1
Book Overview & App PreviewWritten by
Prateek Prasad
The past decade has seen significant technological innovation. Smartphones, which were
considered a luxury not long ago, have become mainstream, and internet connectivity is
accessible to a broader demographic. Not only has this enabled users to express
themselves in new ways, it’s drastically skewed what “computing” means by moving
these capabilities out of an office and into the palm of their hands. For many users, a
smartphone is their very first computer.

This is nothing short of a paradigm shift that has fundamentally altered numerous aspects
of our lives. It’s made the world a smaller place by bringing people closer to one other. It
has altered our social behavior and caused entirely new industries to spring up. It’s mind-
blowing to realize that the phones we have on us at all times are exponentially more
capable than the computers that landed humans on the moon.

Looking back at how this ecosystem has evolved, we can see that even the entry-level
devices available today are significantly more capable than their premium counterparts
were in the early days. Smartphones now have more sophisticated interfaces, graphics
and animations and ship with many more sensors to accurately analyze the world around
us.

This translates into smarter, more capable apps that solve a host of problems — and do it
with delight. It’s hard to find an industry that apps haven’t impacted. It’s far easier to
reach out to your audience and offer your services if you have an app. This has made
distribution more effortless and has leveled the playing field for everyone. But it’s also
made it more important to know how to design an app that goes beyond pure utility.



Why design matters
With smartphones becoming mainstream, our perception of design and how design
impacts us daily has changed as well. With the original iPhone, apps tried to mimic the
real world with what’s called skeuomorphic design. And they did this for a good reason.
The iPhone was an entirely new device, the first in its category, so the only mental model
users had when they came to it sprang from using real-world objects.

Notes were literal sheets of paper with tears at the top. Contacts looked like a physical
address book and there was liberal use of wood and leather across the board. Looking
back at it now, it looks dated and maybe even childish to some of you. But it was
revolutionary at the time.
As humans, we rely on habits to interact with the physical world. We don’t need to learn
how to use a notebook every time we buy one because we’re already familiar with them.
The original iPhone leveraged these tendencies. Coming as close as possible to real-world
objects made it easier for users to transfer their habits to a thin sheet of glass and make
that cognitive leap.

Ten years later, we no longer need to mimic the real world — but it’s invaluable to reflect
upon the journey. As technology has advanced, user’s expectations from apps have also
changed. An app doesn’t just need to work. It has to look good, feel intimate and familiar,
and be delightful while still being unique enough to attract attention and establish its
identity.

That’s where this book fits in. It will teach you how to integrate design decisions to your
apps. You’ll learn how to go beyond merely functional apps to create well-made, well-
considered ones.



About this book
The book starts from the beginning, assuming you have no prior experience. It covers all
the basics, such as layout and composition, color and typography, flow and transitions,
and more. You’ll use Figma, a modern design app, to learn the fundamentals of the craft
while learning how to use the tool itself. You’ll apply the lessons you learn to a sample
app for a single point of reference throughout the book.


Movie tracking app
In this book, you’ll design Cinematic, an app for tracking movies. The app allows users
to view trending and top-rated movies and make a list of movies they wish to watch.
Here’s how it looks:
     Assumptions about the audience
     This book is for you if you are:

        Someone with no prior design experience or training.
        Someone with no familiarity with specialized design tools like Photoshop, Sketch
  or Figma.
        Unable pay for design tools, unless you can use them as a regular part of your
  workflow.
        Unable to hire a designer for your projects.
        Someone who wants to do more of the design on your own or level up your skills.



     Chapter summaries
     Here’s a synopsis of each chapter as a preview of what to expect:

1.          Book Overview & App Preview: This is the chapter you’re currently reading.
    Get an overview of the book including a brief look at what’s coming up in each chapter.
    Set up your Figma design workspace and learn how to access the project files. Jump in
    and get started right away with a quick project.
2.          Tour of Workspace & Figma Fundamentals: Get an introduction to key tools in
    Figma like shapes, frames, sizing, alignment, colors and layers and apply your learnings
    to design a screen from scratch.
3.          App Teardown: Trace over provided screenshots for two popular apps to study
    their layout and identify patterns and structures used to build them.
4.          Wireframing & Screen Layout: Learn about the importance of wireframing and
    how to incorporate it into your design process. Create wireframes of a few screens and
    their components and build a scaffold of the app flow by defining the navigation between
    screens.
5.          Reusable Elements & Data: Learn to build reusable components for common UI
    elements like buttons, toolbars and content cards. Incorporate sample text and image data
    for more realism. Leverage resuable components for faster iterations and to build more
    flexible designs.
6.          Typography: Learn typography basics for communicating hierarchy, order and
    emphasis.
7.          Colors: Gain an overview of color basics by learning common practices and
    creating palettes. Create visual styles for consistency throughout the app.
8.          Transitions & Animations: Explore the prototyping tools to create a full app
    walkthrough. Create different transitions between screens to communicate the
    relationship among elements.
9.          Feedback & Testing: Explore the collaboration tools to test designs on multiple
    devices and solicit feedback about the app goals and overall user experience.
10.         Design Systems & Visual Language: Learn how to build a design system to
    establish brand consistency. Gain insights into fundamental design decisions by analyzing
    Apple’s Human Interface Guidelines and Google’s Material Design.
11.           Recap & Next Steps: Review of the lessons learned and how to apply them when
      starting from scratch. Sources for inspiration and useful resources. Suggestions for
      continued learning and mastering design skills.


      Starter files
      Each chapter comes with starter files to make it easier for you to focus on the topic
      lessons, rather than fiddling with setup issues.

      The files are Figma files with a .fig extension. You’ll also have access to final versions of
      each chapter file for reference.



      Setting up Figma
      Figma is a relatively new design app that’s rapidly gaining popularity. It’s comparable to
      Sketch or Adobe Photoshop, with standard tools for drawing shapes, using fonts, images,
      colors, etc. It also has built-in prototyping features to simulate interactive walkthroughs.

      Some of Figma’s best features are that it:

            Is a cross-platform app.
            Is free to use for up to three projects, which is sufficient for this book.
            Has a vibrant third-party plugin ecosystem to enhance your workflow.
            Has apps on iOS and Android, which means you can view and interact with the
      projects on whichever device you use.


      Sign up
      Create an account at figma.com.


      Launch the app
      While Figma comes with native apps for both Mac and Windows, for the purposes of this
      book, you’ll use Figma on the browser to keep things consistent across chapters.

      Log in to your newly created Figma account on figma.com


      Install the Mirror app
      Finally, download the Figma Mirror app for your iOS and Android devices. You can find
      links at figma.com/downloads or search for Figma Mirror in the iOS App Store or the
      Google Play store.
    Taking Figma for a spin
    Here’s what you’ll learn in this first chapter:

          Importing a design to Figma
          Creating a prototype
          Adding a button element to your design


    Getting started
    Log in to Figma, if you haven’t yet. If you’re inside a new file that Figma created for you,
    click the top-left navigation button and select Back to Files.




    Select the Drafts tab, where you’ll find three pre-installed projects from Figma. You’ll
    see something similar to this image:




    Next, find chapter-1-starter.fig in the book downloads and drag it into the Figma app
    window to import the project.
Double-click chapter-1-starter to open the project.




The project has three frames that represent three screens of the app. The movie-list frame
shows a list of movies under the Trending category, while two movie details frames
show the details of the movies “Birds of Prey” and “Frozen 2”.

These screens may look static, but it’s an interactive prototype.


Viewing as an interactive prototype
To interact with the prototype, click the Present button from the Toolbar. You’ll find it at
the top-right corner of your screen.
A new browser tab will open with the movie-list screen inside an iPhone 11 Pro
Max device frame. The list is scrollable, but the status bar and the bottom navigation stay
anchored.
If you click anywhere on this browser tab, the interactive components will flash,
indicating where you must click. In this case, it’s the Birds of Prey movie card, which is
the first item on the list.
Clicking the card takes you to the details screen for the movie. You can scroll through the
screen and see the different sections.
Having the ability to design and prototype the interactions in one tool is powerful and
reduces a lot of friction and back and forth in typical design workflows.
As a quick-start exercise, you’ll link the Frozen 2 movie screen to its detail screen. Also,
there’s no way for you to navigate back to the movie-list screen as of now. You’ll build
a Close button to exit the details screen.

This quick exercise will get your hands dirty and give you a feel for the process. The
upcoming chapters will go deeper into individual aspects of the tool and the process but
for now, go have some fun!


Creating a link between two screens
Go back to the Figma editor window and click on the Prototype option in the Properties
panel on the right.




In the Layers panel on the left, expand the movie-list frame, and select the frozen-
2 group as shown below.




You’ll see a o button on the right edge of the card.
When you hover over the o it will turn into a +. Click on the + and drag the arrow to
the movie-details-frozen-2 frame. This links the Frozen 2 card to its details screen.
An Interaction Details menu will appear, detailing the animation, navigation and
transition properties. Leave everything at their default values and close the menu by
clicking the X at the top-right.




Click the Present button again to view the interactive prototype. You’re now able to
navigate to the Frozen 2 movie details screen by clicking the card in the list.

Awesome job building your very first interaction! You’ll now create a Close button to go
back to the movie-list screen.


Adding a button to the details screen
Go back to the Editor tab and click the Design option in the Properties panel on the right.
From the Toolbar on top, click Shape Tools and select Ellipse (O).




Now, click anywhere on the movie-details-birds-of-prey frame. This will add
a 100x100 circle to the screen. You’ll find this option in the Layers panel to your left, as
well.
    Select the circle by clicking it, then give it the following properties:

          X = 16
          Y = 60
          W = 60
          H = 60




    Note: X and Y values define the X and Y coordinates of this circle, while W and H represent
    its width and height.

    You’ll now change the color of the button. To do so, select the Fill option from the
    Properties panel on the right and give it a white (#FFFFFF) fill.
Instead of manually creating the X symbol using lines, you’ll cheat a little and use the
letter X to keep things simple. Sneaky right?

From the Toolbar at the top, select Text (T) and click inside the circle to add a text layer.




Type X in uppercase in the text layer.
From the Text section of the Properties panel, give this layer a font size of 32 and use
the Roboto font with the Regular weight.




The X is not centered in the circle yet. To fix that, hold Shift and select both the circle
and the text layer.




Now, select Align Horizontal Centers to align the two layers horizontally.




Next, select Align Vertical Centers to bring the text into the circle’s center.
It’s time to group the layers. Keeping both the circle and the text layer selected, right-
click and select Group Selection.




Note: Grouping two layers wraps them into one entity, letting you move and resize all
enclosing layers collectively. This comes in handy when working with UI elements that
consist of many smaller parts.
Double-click on the group in the Layers panel and name it close-button.




Great job building your first button! Now, it’s time to link your button to the movie-list
screen so you can go back to the list from the details screen.

Start by clicking the Prototype option from the Properties panel. Now, select close-
button from the Layers panel and click on the ○ and drag a link to the movie-list frame.




Go back to the interactive prototype by clicking Present. You can now return to the
movie-list screen by clicking the Close button on the details screen.
You need to add the Close button to the movie-details-frozen-2 screen as well. Instead of
creating it from scratch, select close-button and press Command/Control-C to copy the
button. Now, select the movie-details-frozen-2 frame and press Command/Control-V.




Not only will this copy the button along with the correct positioning, but it will copy the
link you created earlier as well.

Go back to the interactive prototype by clicking the Present button and you’ll see
the Close button on the Frozen 2 details screen.


Previewing on a device
To take your prototyping to the next level, deploy your prototypes to a physical device
and interact with them. Install the Figma Mirror app from the App Store or Play Store
and log in to your Figma account.
All you need to do now is select the frame you want to view on your device, and voilà, it
will appear. It’s fully interactive.

Note that the prototype may not fit perfectly on your device due to the size differences,
but Figma Mirror still does an excellent job of scaling the designs — close to perfection.

Great job with the quick-start exercise! You built your first UI element and interaction
from scratch. This is quite an achievement and you should be proud of yourself. Even
though you haven’t thoroughly dived into Figma yet, this introduction hopefully gave you
a quick look into what you’ll finally be able to build from scratch after going through this
book.
    2
    Workspace Tour & Figma
    FundamentalsWritten by Prateek Prasad
    In the last chapter, you started by going over the importance of design and how it can
    help you, as a developer, to collaborate effectively with your design team. You also set up
    your design workspace in Figma and learned how to import the project files that you’ll
    use going forward. Now, you’re ready to be part of the early conversations that steer the
    direction of your product’s development.

    While learning how to use Figma is an important part of this book, the most important
    thing to come away with is an understanding of foundational design principles that you
    can leverage with any tool.

    Tools come and go, and there will always be a newer, fancier one you might want to use.
    But as long as you approach design from the foundational principles, you’ll be able to
    translate your ideas into real-world designs, regardless of which tool you use. The
    ultimate goal of this book is to make the tools take a back seat, becoming merely a means
    to your creative expression.

    You might wonder, why pick Figma instead of Sketch, Photoshop or another popular
    tool? There are a few strong reasons to use Figma:

        It’s is free to start with, unlike other programs that require an upfront purchase or
  subscription.
        Figma plays nicely with other popular tools, like Sketch and Adobe XD, so you
  can bring files created in those tools over to Figma without issues.

    But, by far, the biggest motivation behind using Figma is that it’s a browser-based design
    tool, which makes it universally accessible. As long as you can open websites on your
    device, you can use Figma, whether you have a Mac, a Windows computer, a Linux
    machine or even an iPad!

    While Figma comes with a fairly minimal interface and toolset, it has powerful features
    that make rapid prototyping and iteration extremely easy. When designing, you want to
    explore as many alternatives as possible and iterate over them quickly. You don’t want
    your creative exploration to get bogged down by tedious revisions and adjustments.
    Learning how to harness Figma’s features will help you get more done with less effort.

    In this chapter, you’ll go over Figma’s interface, look at its fundamental features and play
    with the different tools and options to get a feel for how they work.

    Now, it’s time for your introduction to Figma.
     Exploring the Figma interface
     Log in to Figma, if you haven’t yet. Then create a new Draft. Figma’s UI has four
     distinct sections:

1.        The canvas: The main area in the middle of the screen, where you’ll work.
2.        Layers panel: Located on the left side, the Layers panel houses all your screens
   and the components that make them.
3.        Properties panel: Find this panel on the right side of your screen. You’ll use it to
   tweak and change the attributes — height, width, color, etc. — of the different elements
   you’ll work with.
4.        Toolbar: This sits on top of the screen as a horizontal strip. You’ll find the basic
   building blocks used to create designs — shapes, texts, frames, etc. — on the toolbar
   alongside options to navigate your workspace and access Figma’s preferences and files.




     Now that you’ve gotten a look at the Figma interface, it’s time to create the frame where
     your design will live.



     Starting with a frame
     Frames are central to any design that you create. You can think of them as containers that
     house the different elements that make up your design.

     Figma ships with frames that mimic the display area of popular devices. For the screens
     you’ll design in this book, you’ll use iPhone 11 Pro Max as the frame. Select it by
     pressing F on your keyboard or by clicking Frame in the toolbar, then selecting
     the iPhone 11 Pro Max option.
It now shows up in your Layers panel on the left.




Note: The default frame options are handy, but you can always create a custom frame by
pressing F and clicking and dragging anywhere on the canvas.

Zoom in and out of the canvas by pressing Command/Control and scrolling up or down.

Now that you’ve added a frame to work with, it’s time to learn about another fundamental
part of Figma: shapes. In the next section, you’ll learn how to work with and style shapes
by creating a simple sign-up button.



Adding shapes
Click the Shape Tools option on the toolbar to reveal the different kinds of shapes
available.
Note: If there’s a shortcut available for an option in Figma, it will show up next to the option.
In this case, the shortcut to add a rectangle is R, for an oval, it’s O, etc. Over time, the more
you use keyboard shortcuts, the more quickly you’ll navigate through Figma’s options.

Select the Rectangle option (R) and click anywhere inside the iPhone frame you added
earlier to add the rectangle to your frame. You’ll eventually turn this rectangle into your
sign-up button.




Note: Whenever you add a layer to a frame, you’ll also see that layer enclosed inside the
frame in the Layers panel on the left.

To modify the rectangle’s size, drag the four handles on the corners or edit the height and
width in the Design tab of the Properties panel on the right. Move the rectangle by
clicking and dragging it.
Note: When using the handles to manipulate a shape’s size, hold Shift to maintain the
proportions. Holding Shift while dragging a shape will allow you to move it in straight lines
horizontally or vertically.

Change the size of the rectangle to 252x55 and give it a corner radius of 8.
Click the + icon in the Fill section of the Properties panel and select a fill of #087FA5.
This gives the shape a nice blue color.
Note: A fill fills a shape with a specific color. A stroke colors the shape’s border. The stroke
width determines the thickness of the border.

For the final touch, click the + icon in the Effects section and give your button a drop
shadow. Use the default values of the drop shadow for now.




Now, press T and click inside the shape to add a text layer to the frame. Type Sign up.

In the Text section of the Properties panel on the right, change the font to Rubik. Use a
font-weight of Medium and a font size of 18. In the Fill section below, select #000000 as
the fill color.

Your canvas should look like this:
Note: Figma comes with the entire Google Fonts library, you just have to search for the font
by name.

Now that you’ve put the basic elements of a button in place, it’s time to learn about
alignment.



Aligning layers
The first row in the Properties panel is made up of six alignment options. These options
help you align your layers with respect to either your frame or to each other.




Select the text layer and click the Align Horizontal Centers option. This will align your
text layer to the horizontal center of the frame.
Next, click Align Vertical Centers to align the text layer with the vertical center of the
frame. Note that this will move the text outside of your shape. Don’t worry, you’ll fix that
in a moment.




To be sure the vertical positioning is correct, validate it by checking the positioning of the
layer. Select the text layer and bring your mouse outside the text layer while still within
the frame, then press Alt/Option. Red lines will appear on all four sides of the text field,
showing the distance from the frame edges on all four sides.
Now, do the same for the rectangle.




Once both the text layer and rectangle are in the frame’s center, you’ll group them so you
can move them together as one.


Grouping layers
To group the layers, select the text layer, press and hold Shift, then click the rectangle.
You can see that both layers are selected in the Layers panel on the left.

Once you’ve selected both layers, right-click and select Group Selection or
press Command/Control-G.
Now, you can move both layers collectively.
Note: You can use the four arrow keys to move shapes and groups around in increments of 1.
This is extremely helpful when you want to align things precisely. To move in increments
of 10, hold down the Shift key while you press the arrow keys.

There are four more alignment options, which you should play around with. They let you
position your shapes to the left, top, right and bottom with respect to each other or the
enclosing frame.

Now that you know a bit about how to add elements to your design, it’s time to create a
beautiful login screen for your app.



Creating Cinematic’s login screen
You’ll now leverage your knowledge of shapes, text and properties to create the
following screen:
Change the fill of the text layer you created earlier to white and change the text to I’m
new to Cinematic. You will notice that the text no longer fits within the rectangle.




You could fix the alignment of the rectangle and the text, but wouldn’t it be nicer to have
buttons that resize automatically?

This is where one of Figma’s most powerful features comes into play: Auto Layout.


Auto Layout
Auto Layout lets you create frames that adapt to the size of their contents. This makes it
easy to create responsive UI elements.
Press Command/Control-Z and change the text back to Sign up, then make sure your
text and rectangle are horizontally and vertically aligned. Once that’s done, select the
group and click the + icon under the Auto Layout section of the Properties panel to add
Auto Layout. You can also use the keyboard shortcut: Shift-A.




Visually, nothing’s changed — but your button is now an Auto Layout frame that
dynamically resizes based on the text.

To test it, change the text to I’m new to Cinematic again. You’ll see your button grow
automatically while respecting the alignment.




You’ll use Auto Layout quite extensively in this book. But for now, it’s time to set up
your login screen’s layout.


Creating a grid layout
The login screen’s final design has a grid of movie posters in the background with a
gradient overlay. There are two posters per row.

Start setting this up by adding a rectangle (R) to the frame. Give it a width of 414/2 —
half of the width of your frame — and a height of 283.
Note: Figma supports arithmetic expressions in the fields that accept numeric input. Use this
handy feature to create elements with precise dimensions.
Select this rectangle, then press and hold Alt/Option and drag it to the right to create a
duplicate.




Now, select both of the rectangles and duplicate the row vertically three times so you
have eight rectangles in total. Your last two rectangles might go out of the frame, as
shown in the screenshot below.
That’s because, if a shape’s dimension exceeds the frame bounds, it gets added to the
canvas but stays outside the frame. To fix this, just select the two rectangles outside of the
frame bounds in the Layers panel and drag them back into the frame.

Select all the rectangles you just created and put them in a group. Then rename the group
to posters-grid by double-clicking the name in the Layers panel.

While you’re at it, rename the button frame to sign-up-button and move the layer above
the posters-grid layer to make it visible. Your Layers panel will look like this when
you’re done:
Now that you have your grid set up, you’ll fill it in with gorgeous movie poster images.


Adding images to the background
Press and hold Command/Control and click the rectangle on the top left. From the Fill
section, click the fill color and from the drop-down menu at the top-left of the pop-up,
click Image.




Click the Choose image button in the middle of the pop-up and navigate to the movie-
images folder in your downloaded project files for this chapter.
Pick any image and close the pop-up, then repeat the same process for all the other
rectangles until you fill the grid with images.

Once done, click the lock icon next to posters-grid in the Layers panel. Locking a layer
prevents you from accidentally changing it or moving it out of place.




Next, you’ll add a background color to make the images blend together seamlessly.


Adding a gradient
To create a gradient background, add a rectangle to the frame and give it a size
of 414×896, which is the size of your frame, then place it at X = 0 and Y = 0. Place this
layer between the sign-up-button and posters-grid layers and name it gradient.
Now, from the Fill section’s drop-down, click Linear to give this layer a linear gradient.




Select the left handle in the gradient slider and give it a color
of #018AA8 and 50% opacity. Then select the right handle in the gradient slider and give
it a color of #060D31 and 100% opacity.
Your gradient layer will look like this:




Displaying the Cinematic name
Next, add a text layer above the gradient layer and enter Cinematic, the name of the app.
Give this layer a fill color of white, a font size of 77, and use the Pacifico font with
a Regular weight. Add a drop shadow to this layer, using the default values, by clicking
the + in the Effects section and selecting Drop Shadow. Finally, align it horizontally to
the frame and position it 204 from the top by entering 204 in the Y field of the Properties
panel.




At this point, you have nearly all of the elements you need for your log-in screen.
Congratulations!


Adding a sign-in button
The last piece you need on this screen is the sign-in button. You’ll add that now.

First, place the sign-up-button at a margin of 119 from the bottom.




Now, add another text layer with the text Sign in. Give it a font size of 16 and use
the Rubik font with a font-weight of Medium. Give this layer a fill color of white.

Align it horizontally and position it 36 below the sign-up-button by using the arrow
keys. Remember, you can always see how far one layer is from another by using
the Alt/Option button while the layer is selected.
Group the two buttons and rename the group: buttons-group. Position this group 64 from
the bottom edge of the frame and align it horizontally. Remember to use
the Alt/Option key to check the positioning.

Congratulations! You now have all the elements of your log-in screen in place. Next,
you’ll do some polishing to ensure the screen always looks great.



Constraining the layers
Right now, the log-in screen looks great. But what happens if you use a different device
than the one you selected for your frame? The design will shift out of place if the screen
size is different.

Since you always want the buttons to be on the bottom part of the screen, you can
use constraints to configure the button group so that no matter what your frame or device
size is, the group always aligns itself to the bottom.

Constraints are another powerful feature in Figma. They allow you to configure how your
objects and layers are positioned relative to one another, across different frames or screen
sizes.

Constraints, along with Auto Layout, are concepts that iOS developers will already be
familiar with, but using them in Figma doesn’t translate exactly to how they work in
code.

Auto Layout and constraints do similar things in both environments, letting you build
responsive and adaptive UIs. For Android Developers, Constraint Layout offers
constraint and Auto Layout features.

Click the frame and decrease the height to 759. You’ll notice that the buttons get cut off.
Reset the frame to its original height and select buttons-group. From
the Constraints option in the Properties panel, Select Left & Right for the horizontal
constraints and Bottom for the vertical constraint.




Do the same for the Cinematic layer and pin its position to the top of the screen.

Now, modify the frame height and you’ll see the button group and Cinematic layers retain
their positions, no matter the size of the frame.

And that’s it! Reset the frame to its original height of 896. Your screen in its final state
will look like this:
3
App TeardownsWritten by Prateek Prasad
In the last chapter, you explored Figma’s workspace and built a sign-in screen using
Figma’s fundamental shapes.

Before diving deeper into Figma and building more screens, you’ll now go through an
app teardown exercise to study the discovery screens of two popular apps: Airbnb and
Pocket Casts.

Part of developing your style and an eye for good design is drawing inspiration from
other apps. Doing teardowns helps you understand why things were built the way they
were, while also building your understanding of common layout patterns and design
decisions.

Tearing down an entire app is beyond the scope of this chapter. Instead, you’ll limit your
focus to Airbnb and Pocket Casts’ discovery experience. [TODO: FPE: “Discovery
experience” doesn’t mean anything to me. Will it be clear to our readers, or should we
use another term?]

The primary motivation behind picking these two apps is that their design is consistent
across both iOS and Android. This helps you look at the broader picture without delving
too much into platform-specific nuances.



Loading the starter file
Start in Figma’s Files screen, then drag chapter-3-starter.fig into the main Figma
window to import it. This file is in your downloaded materials under Chapter-
3/projects/starter.

Alternatively, click the Import button at the top right to navigate to the file and import it.
Open the imported project. You’ll see two screenshots that you’ll trace in this exercise.

While the two apps are drastically different, they’re built on the same principles and
patterns. Sure, they use different typography, color palettes and layouts to establish their
visual identity and brand. But, by looking at each app more closely, you’ll notice the
repeated patterns and common building blocks that their designers used to build these
screens.


Tracing Airbnb’s explore screen
First, you’ll focus on the Airbnb app. To make it easy to notice the patterns, you’ll focus
on one section of the app and break it down. In this case, you’ll trace the list.

Start with the Top sellers section, which has two distinct elements: the section header and
the horizontal scrolling list of cards. This section is repeated vertically across the screen
for different categories.
    Focus on the card element. It consists of:

          Header image with a status tag and a Favorite button
          Ratings
          Name
          Details
          Pricing
Now that you understand the composition, you can see that the screen is made up of only
a few unique elements. What differentiates each instance is the data it represents.

This will become even clearer once you trace out the entire screen. Instead of replicating
the app, you’ll trace the component boundary to create a low fidelity scaffold. The goal is
to gain insights into structure and layout, not to clone the UI.

In the airbnb-trace frame, select the screenshot image, reduce its opacity to 10% in the
Layer section of the Properties panel, then lock the layer. This will make your trace easier
to see.

Select the rectangle tool, then trace over the first section’s heading. In the Fill section of
the Properties panel, remove the fill for this rectangle by clicking the - icon and give it a
stroke instead so you can see the element boundaries. Give it a corner radius of 8.
Do the same with the first image card, giving it a corner radius of 16.




Now, use rectangles to trace the four vertical text sections and give them each a corner
radius of 8.

To make this even more effortless, use Auto Layout to maintain the margins while you
create the repetitions. You can duplicate a shape by selecting it in the Layers panel and
pressing Command/Control-D.

When you’re done, group (G) all the layers that make up the card.

Now that you’ve created one instance of this trace, you can duplicate the group for other,
similar items in the section. Make sure that they’re aligned correctly!

Once one section is complete, group (G) the list with the section header. Take note of
how you’re composing smaller elements into larger components that you can reuse.
Repeat the tracing for the remaining three sections of the screen, then hide the screenshot
altogether and look at the trace now. Notice how the section header rectangles visually
divide the list, even without the data.




The layout amplifies the screen’s core structure, which, aside from the navigation bar on
top, is made up of only two components!


Tracing Pocket Casts’ discover screen
While the Pocket Casts screenshot doesn’t look as straightforward as Airbnb, this method
will still work!

Unlike Airbnb, Pocket Casts uses different section styles to surface different things within
the same list. The app uses a total of five section styles. Check them out:
Most apps with a scrollable feed of items compose multiple item types to create a list. For
this exercise, you’ll go top-down and trace the list sections, one by one.

Start by reducing the screenshot’s transparency and locking the layer.

For the top section, Featured, trace over the thumbnail. Give it a stroke, remove the fill,
and change the corner radius to 4. Do the same for the other text elements in the section,
giving them each a corner radius of 8.




Next, trace the Trending section’s heading and the Show All text, then group (G) them
into a header. You can reuse this header component across multiple other sections of the
screen.
Trace over the list items, group them (G) and name the group list item. Use Auto Layout
to duplicate the trace, adjusting the width of the text layers accordingly.




Now, trace race the Sponsored section and group it (G).




Note: It’s a good practice to maintain a top-down visual order in your Layers panel, which
means that sections and items that appear first on the screen should be on the top of the
Layers list. That makes it easy to find elements when you have to search through many layers
and items in each frame.

The Guest List section is interesting. Trace the rectangle backdrop, giving it a corner
radius of 8. Next, trace the avatar image, giving it a stroke width of 4 and placing the
stroke outside. Make sure your avatar layer is on top of the backdrop layer.




You may notice that, since the shapes have no fill, the backdrop’s stroke is visible
through the avatar circle. That looks a little out of place.

To fix this, first select the circle and give it a fill. Now, select the circle and the backdrop
and click the Boolean operations’ drop-down on the toolbar. Finally, click Subtract
Selection.




You’ll notice that the circle gets punched out of the backdrop.
Boolean operations help you cut one shape out of the other or combine them in different
ways. Take a moment to play with them to get a feel of how they work.

Now that you’ve punched out the avatar, create a new avatar circle on top of the
subtracted layer with the same properties you used earlier.




Trace out the text layer and group (G) this section. Call this group guest-list.

If you’ve been organizing your groups as suggested earlier, your Layers panel should
look like this:
For The Little Ones section, follow the same approach as you did with the Airbnb
horizontal scrolling list. Trace out the first card and then use Auto Layout to construct the
list.




For the Network Highlight section, duplicate the Guest List section and adjust the trace
boundaries.
Finally, for the Popular in United States section, duplicate the Trending section.




Now, hide the screenshot entirely and analyze the repetition. Unlike Airbnb, Pocket Casts
reuses smaller building blocks across components. They also stagger their repetitions.
Great job completing the app teardowns! By leveraging your knowledge of basic shapes,
you traced these screenshots and uncovered the fundamental pieces used to build the
screens.

A large part of each app’s experience was crafted by standing on the shoulders of
reusable components with unique data. This exercise lets you see this in practice.

This is a significant realization at this stage, and you’ll find that most apps work this way.

As you dive into future chapters, this idea will become more apparent. While you’re at it,
you’ll also learn techniques that will help you fly through Figma.

In the next chapter, you’ll start wireframing the screen layout and work on the app flow
for the Cinematic app.
4
Wireframing & Screen LayoutWritten by
Prateek Prasad
In the previous chapter, you went over Figma’s basic shape and styling options and used
them to create a sign-in screen. You also went through an app teardown exercise to
uncover common patterns across two popular apps. In the process, you learned how to
reuse and compose simple building blocks to create unique design variations.

Figma has many more tools to offer, which you’ll look into eventually. For now,
however, you’ll leverage the skills you picked up in the last chapter to start laying the
foundation for your movie app, Cinematic.

In this chapter, you’ll start wireframing the app and build a scaffold that you’ll flesh out
in the upcoming chapters.



The importance of wireframing
Wireframing is essential in UI design. It allows you to give structure to your ideas and
materialize them. Wireframing exposes the rough edges in your thoughts early on so you
can iterate them without time-wasting changes and revisions.

Diving directly into creating high-fidelity mockups that look and feel real might seem
tempting at this stage, and for good reason. But you are going to start with wireframes as
working in low-fidelity helps prevent wasting time and effort.

Wireframing is particularly crucial when working in a cross-functional team because it
lets key stakeholders get involved early in the ideation phase to discuss different
approaches. It opens up the discussion about which direction to take and promotes
collaboration. Your collaborators don’t need to know how a specific tool works to
provide valuable input.

When you’re wireframing an app, it’s essential to keep customization and styling to a
bare minimum. Wireframes need to be generic enough to allow for rapid iteration and
exploration while still having critical building blocks in place to define the foundation of
the core experience. This stage in design focuses more on function and less on form.

Establishing the core flow and functional structure with wireframes will allow you to
modify and tune the app’s cosmetic aspects in the future. In the chapters that follow,
you’ll build on top of the wireframe, adding the finer details and polish like establishing a
palette and a typographic scale.



Defining the app’s concept
    Before you turn to the drawing board, it’s helpful to define the idea you’re working
    toward.

    In this case, you’re building a movie tracking app that lets users curate a list of movies
    they want to watch and gives details about the movie, like the cast, genre, duration,
    ratings and so on.

    From the intent above, you can break down the app into a few key features. It should:

          Display a list of movies.
          Show the movie details.
          Let the user bookmark/favorite a movie.

    Breaking the broad idea down into smaller features helps you focus on them one at a time
    without worrying about the big picture.

    Now that you have defined these key features, you’ll tackle them one by one. As you
    work, you’ll keep the details and finish in the wireframes low-fidelity so you can change
    things around quickly and create multiple iterations.

    Launch Figma and create a new file. Add a new frame to the canvas by pressing F and
    selecting the iPhone 11 Pro Max frame. Name the file cinematic-wireframe by clicking
    on an empty spot in the canvas and then clicking on the file name in the toolbar.




    Designing the movies list
    For the first iteration, you’ll create a conventional list, like the ones you’ve seen in most
    of the apps you use. The list item will have five components:
          Movie poster
          Movie name
          Metadata (release year, director, etc.)
          Genres
          Rating

    Start building this screen by adding a 414×224 rectangle (R) for the movie list item
    container, then removing the fill and adding a black stroke. Align the rectangle to the top
    and left of the frame by either moving it manually or by setting the X and Y fields to 0 in
    the properties panel. Finally, name the frame container.

    Now, add another rectangle (R) for the movie poster measuring 125×192. Remove the
    fill, and add a black stroke. Switch to the Line Shape Tool (L) and add two diagonal
    lines. Align the ends of each line to the corners of the rectangle to create an x. Group the
    rectangle and diagonal lines and name the group movie-image.

    Position movie-image inside the container on the left side. Give it a margin of 16 on the
    left, top, and bottom from the sides of the container by moving it manually or by setting
    the X and Y fields to 16 in the properties panel. Your list item should look like this:




    Adding the movie name
    For the movie name, add a text layer (T) with SpiderMan Far From Home, a font size
    of 24 and the font Roboto-Regular. Name this layer movie-name, align it to the left
    of movie-image with a left margin of 32, a right margin of 32 and a top margin of 16.
Adding the metadata
For the next row, which contains the movie metadata, add a text layer (T) with 2019 to
denote the movie release year. Give it a size of 14 and use the font Roboto with
a Regular weight.

Then, duplicate the release year layer and change the text to 1h 42 min denoting the
movie’s duration. Select both these text layers and create an Auto Layout (Shift-A). In the
Auto Layout Properties, select Auto Height and a horizontal spacing of 12. Add another
text layer (T) in the layout with Cathy Yan, denoting the director.

The Auto Layout with the three text layers should look like this:




Name the Auto Layout movie-info and place it below movie-name with a top margin
of 16.


Adding genres
For the genres row, create a rectangle (R) measuring 51×18 with a default fill. Now, add a
text layer (T) on top of the rectangle with the text set to Action, a font size of 12 and the
font Roboto-Regular. Align the text to the rectangle horizontally and vertically. With
both layers selected, change the constraints to center.
Next, with both layers selected, create an Auto Layout (Shift-A) and name it genre. This
makes the background rectangle resize according to the text width.

Duplicate genre and change the text to Drama. Place the duplicated genre to the right of
the Action genre with a margin of 8. Now, select both genre auto layouts and create
another Auto Layout (Shift-A) to create a row. Name this auto layout genres. Duplicate
one of the genre auto layouts and change the text to Fiction. Notice that the margin and
constraints stay consistent.

Place the genres row below the movie-info row with a top margin of 16.




Adding ratings
For the rating row, select the Star from the Shape Tools menu.
Add a 20×20 Star with a fill color of black. Duplicate this layer five times and, with all
five star layers selected, use Auto Layout (Shift-A) to create a row of five stars.
Select Horizontal alignment and add a margin of 8 between each star. Change the fill
color of the fifth star to gray. Finally, name this auto layout rating.

Here’s what it should look like:




Place this row below the genres layer with a top margin of 16.

Group all the layers in your frame and name it movie-list-item. Duplicate the movie-list-
item four times and, with all four groups selected, use Auto Layout (Shift-A) and name
the result movies-list. Inside each movie-list item, change the name of the movie
accordingly.

This list can be a category of movies like trending, top-rated, etc. In this app, you’ll
display two types of movies along with a user-curated favorites section. You can reuse
the list across the different sections to a great extent, but you’ll need a way to navigate.


Creating the navigation
Start by adding a 414×52 rectangle (R) with a default fill and a black stroke to the frame.
Align it to the bottom of the frame and place it on top of the movies list. This rectangle
will serve as a container for the navigation destinations.
On top of this rectangle, add a 36×36 ellipse (O) with a fill of #7A7575. Align the ellipse
vertically with the rectangle and place it to the rectangle’s left with a margin of 29.




Duplicate the ellipse and align the new ellipse horizontally to the rectangle, placing it in
the center. Select the two ellipses and use Auto Layout (Shift-A).

Duplicate the ellipse one more time, giving you three ellipses representing the three
destinations. Because the first two ellipses are using Auto Layout the third ellipse should
automatically be positioned to the right side of the navigation container.

Group the rectangle and the ellipses and name the group bottom-navigation.




Great job creating your first wireframe! Even though this screen isn’t fleshed out with
real data, you can see a preliminary structure taking form.
    Looking at the wireframe you just created, you’ll notice that certain elements will
    probably stay the same across different variations, for example:

          The movie poster element
          The rating row
          The genres row

    You’d make the overall iteration much faster by extracting them so you can reuse them.
    It’s time to take a quick detour and learn about another powerful Figma feature.



    Components
Components in Figma are UI elements that you can reuse across multiple design files.
They allow you to create consistent designs and make changes quickly.

A great way to visualize this is to consider the rating row in your current wireframe.
Imagine you’ve created ten different wireframes that show the ratings in the form of stars.
Each of these iterations has seven movie cards. If you later decide to change the icon
from a star to a heart, you’d have to make changes in 70 places! That’s a lot of wasted
time and unnecessary changes.

This is where components shine. They let you create consistent elements once, then reuse
them. When you make changes, you only need to modify them in one place and those
changes will reflect across files.

You’ll try this out by converting the movie image, genre row, the rating row and the
navigation bar into components.


Creating your components
Before creating your components, take a moment to organize things by breaking them up
on a different frame. Press F and create a new Macbook frame, which you’ll find under
the Desktop category in the Frames menu. Name this frame components.

Note: You’re using a Macbook frame just because it is a good size to work in, not because
we will be making a wireframe for a Macbook app. You also could have just created a
custom frame and set the size to something large enough to provide ample working space.




Now, copy one of the movie-list-item groups to the components frame, then right-click
and select Ungroup. You can now freely move the individual elements that make up the
list item around the canvas.
Duplicate the movie-image group, then click on the Create Component option from the
toolbar on top. Alternatively, you can right-click on the group and click Create
Component.




Nothing has changed visually, but if you look at the Layers panel, the movie-image group
now has a new icon shaped like four diamonds. This icon denotes that the group is now a
component.




Repeat the same process for the genres and rating groups, duplicate them and clean up
their placement on the canvas so it’s easy to differentiate between individual components
on the frame.
Copy over the bottom-navigation group and create a component for it as well.


Implementing your components
Now, in the components canvas, rebuild the movie-list-item card by replacing the movie-
image, genre, and rating groups with the components you just created.

To reuse a component, duplicate it by holding Alt/Option while clicking and dragging it,
or click on the Assets option in the Layers panel to see a list of all your components, as
shown below.
Drag and drop the components you select from the Assets panel into the canvas.

Once you’ve replaced the movie-image, genres, and rating groups with components,
regroup the movie-list-item layers you ungrouped previously. Name this group movie-
list-item and then turn it into a component. Here’s how the component will look in the
Layers panel.
Note: An instance of a component has a single diamond icon, while the main component has
a four-diamond icon.

Your canvas should now have five reusable components, including the movie-list-item,
which is made up of smaller components. Here’s what your components frame should
look like:




Now, it’s time to use the components you just created to clean up the wireframe. In the
process, you’ll see how powerful they are.


Trying out the components
Create a new iPhone 11 Pro Max frame (F) and name it movie-list-wireframe. Add
a bottom-navigation component to this frame by dragging it from the Assets panel then
align it to the bottom of the frame. Set the bottom navigation constraints
to Left and Bottom.

Now, add four instances of the movie-list-item component to the frame. Change the
movies’ names, and while selecting all four movie-list-item components, use Auto
Layout (Shift-A). Name this auto layout movie-list.

Time for some magic! On the components frame, select the movie-image component and
give it a fill of #DAD7D7. As soon as you add a fill to the main component, notice that
all instances immediately reflect the change.
    Now, select the individual genres in the genres component and give them a corner radius
    of 12. You will notice that all genre rows now use a rounded rectangle.




    Components are a powerful feature that makes iteration and revisions extremely fast. The
    next chapter goes into components in more depth and uses them far more extensively. If
    you like what you saw here in this brief introduction, you’ll enjoy working with
    components in the next chapter.



    Reviewing the current list implementation
    The list looks good, but before proceeding, it’s important to spend some time with the
    wireframe and see how it fits in the grand scheme of things. This is also a good time to
    refine your ideas and see if your strategy needs any course correction.

    You started with the idea of building a movie tracking app that lets users curate a list of
    movies they want to watch and that gives details about the movie.

    You then broke down the idea into the overarching goals of:

          Showing a list of movies.
          Showing details about a movie (synopsis, cast, etc.).
          Adding the ability to bookmark/favorite a movie.

    The breakdown was a great starting point, but it leaves many unanswered questions about
    the app’s function.

          Are the movies sorted by release dates or ratings?
           Does the user have an option to modify the list using filters?
           What if the user has already seen a movie? How do we prevent showing the
    viewed movie again?
           Does the concept of favorites make sense in this app, or should we pivot to
    calling it bookmarks, or wishlist?
           Where do the ratings come from?
           Does the year and duration of a movie make sense to show on the card? How
    does that information influence the user’s decision to bookmark a movie?
           Is the information on the list enough for the user and if so, is a detail screen even
    required?

    These questions are difficult to answer because, while some are purely related to design
    and usability, others require input from the engineering teams and more detailed user
    research to figure out what might or might not work. Cross-team collaboration is vital to a
    successful app.

    In an actual product development lifecycle, instead of assuming the user’s preferences
    and requirements, you’d involve those users in development via surveys and studies.
    Doing user research and feedback not only validates your assumptions but also provides
    valuable insights into how they perceive what you’ve built and whether it works for them.

    It’s important to understand that wireframing isn’t the only iterative cycle in product
    development. While wireframing helps you realize the app’s core foundation, the final
    form it takes is heavily influenced by user feedback. This cycle of iteration ▸
    prototyping ▸ feedback repeats with every new feature addition and redesign.

    Prototyping is covered in detail in Chapter 8, “Transitions & Animations” and in Chapter
    9, “Feedback & Testing”, you learn about how to test your designs and get feedback from
    stakeholders.


    Making some decisions
    Since this chapter’s scope is focused on wireframing, you’ll just go over the questions
    above and think about the solutions so you can iterate over the design and continue
    making progress.

          Are the movies sorted by release dates or rating?

    By default, the list is sorted by release date. This will make sure new releases show up at
    the top of the list.

          Does the user have an option to modify the list using filters?

    The initial ideation phase didn’t include this feature, but it makes a lot of sense to allow
    users to filter the list based on their preferences.
         What if the user has already seen a movie? How do we prevent showing the
    viewed movie again?

    The user can curate a list of movies they want to watch. This curated list will be a
    separate section of the app. A bookmarked movie can be marked as seen, which will
    prevent it from appearing on the main list.

           Does the concept of favorites make sense in this app or should we pivot to
    calling it bookmarks or wishlist?

    While the behavior is the same, calling the feature Add to watchlist makes more sense. It
    also provides a clear description of what it does, compared to the other options.

          Where do the ratings come from?

    The ratings come from an external source, like IMDB or Rotten Tomatoes. This is one of
    the decisions that the engineering and product teams have more influence over.

          Does the year and duration of a movie make sense to show on the card? How
    does that information influence the user’s decision to bookmark a movie?

    The release year influences the sorting order, and the duration might be important in
    certain circumstances. If you have a two-hour flight coming up, you’d plan to watch a
    movie that fits your flight duration. This is an assumption at this point, but user feedback
    would help validate and refine the idea.

          Is the information on the list enough for the user and if so, is a detail screen
    even required?

    The list shows information at a glance, but a user’s decision to watch a movie also
    depends on many other factors. Some users like seeing the trailer before deciding, while
    others are picky about the actors. Some even like to spoil it for themselves by reading the
    plot.

    These richer pieces of information are tough to squeeze inside a list, so a detail screen
    makes sense. The detail screen also gives you space to promote sponsored content
    tailored to the user’s preferences, if the need arises.

    Now that you have some actionable answers, revisit the movie list screen. As of now, the
    only piece missing is an option to filter the list.



    Filtering the list
    Your next step is to add a button to surface the filter options.

    In movie-list-wireframe, add an ellipse (O) measuring 55×55 with a default drop shadow
    and fill.
Place this button on the bottom-right of the frame, above the bottom-navigation layer.
Give it a margin of 32 from the right and bottom and name the layer filter-button.




Constrain the button to the Right and Bottom so it adapts to frame size changes.




Instead of taking the user to a different screen, it’s more convenient to display the filter as
a dismissable option in the list screen. The user can filter the list based on genre, release
year, duration and director.

Duplicate the movie-list-wireframe frame and name it movie-list-wireframe-filter.
Delete the filter-button from this frame.

Lock the movies-list and bottom-navigation layers since you aren’t going to make any
changes to them.

Now, add a rectangle (R) to this frame measuring 414×896 above both layers. Reduce the
opacity of this layer to 70%, name it filter-background and lock the layer.
Here’s how your layer arrangement should look at this point:




Add a rectangle measuring 414×448 and give it a white fill. Constrain this layer to
the Center and Bottom and name it filter-sheet. This sheet will house the options to
filter the list.




Add a text layer (T) on the filter-sheet layer with the text Genre. Use Roboto-Regular as
the font with size 18. Place it at a margin of 16 from the top and left and name the
layer filter-header.
Add a genres component and place it below the filter-header at a margin of 16 from the
top and left.




Duplicate the modified genres component three times to get a total of 12 genres, as
shown below.




Repeat the process to create the release year, duration and director filter categories.
Here’s how it should look when you’re done.
    You did a great job building a good chunk of the filter UI on your own. If you’re unsure
    about the margins and positioning of the different filter categories and their options, you
    can refer to the final project file, chapter-3-final.fig, and see how they look in the
    finished project.

    The list screen now offers the ability to filter the movie per the user’s preferences.

    Ideally, when wireframing a feature or a screen, you’d build at least three to four
    alternatives and compare them against each other. This helps you uncover areas that need
    further polish.

    But for now, you’ll move on to working on the movie details UI.



    Designing the movie detail screen
    The detail screen involves a few more bits than the list screen does. This screen will
    show:

          All the information from the movie-list-item
          The movie synopsis
          Cast details
          Movie ratings
          An “Add to watchlist” option

    You’ll reuse most of the information from the movie-list-item on this screen. Add
    an iPhone 11 Pro Max frame (F) to the canvas. Name the frame movie-details-
    wireframe

    Add a movie-image component at a margin of 40 from the top, and change the dimension
    to 174×262. Align it horizontally to the frame.

    Copy over the movie-name and movie info text layers from one of the previous frames
    and change the movie-name text alignment to Text-Align Center.

    Place the movie-name below the movie-image with a margin of 40 from the top. Be sure
    to keep everything horizontally centered in the frame.




    Place the movie-info layer below the movie name, horizontally centered, at a margin
    of 32 from the top. Now, add the genres and rating components to the frame. Place the
    genres below movie-info and the rating below the genres. Give both a margin of 24.
    You’ll notice they are quite small for the screen.

    Select the genres and press K to enter Scale mode. Alternatively, you can
    select Scale from the toolbar at the top of the screen.
Drag the corner handles of the genre row and increase the dimensions
to 218×23 approximately.

Note: Scale may increase your dimensions in decimal values, so you might not get
precisely 218×23. Don’t worry about it, as long as you are close enough to this dimension.
Remember, this is a mock-up, and things don’t need to feel perfect at this stage.




Now, select the rating row and scale the dimension to 237×36. Make sure all layers added
to the frame so far are horizontally aligned.




Next, add a text layer (T) for the synopsis. Don’t worry about displaying an actual
synopsis here. You can now use placeholder text to get a feel of how things will look with
real data in place. A great website to pick up some placeholder text is http://lipsum.com.

Paste nine lines of text onto the text layer. Name this layer movie-synopsis.

Center the text and horizontally align the layer to the frame. Use Roboto-Regular as the
font, with a font size of 12. Position the synopsis at a margin of 32 from the rating row.
For the cast section, add a text layer (T) for the section header with Cast. Name this
layer section-header.

Use Roboto-Regular font with a font size of 24 and place it at a margin of 64 below the
synopsis layer and 16 from the left.




At this point, you might have run out of room to add more layers to the frame. Select the
frame name from the Layers panel and either drag its handles vertically to increase the
height or manually increase the frame’s height to 1587. This should give you enough
room to add the remaining sections to the screen.

Now, add a movie-image component and change the dimension to be 63×63. Place it
below the section header layer at a margin of 24 from the top and 16 from the left. Name
this layer cast-image.
Add a text layer (T) for the cast name below the cast-image with a font size of 16 and
align it horizontally with the cast-image. Use John Doe as the text. Name this layer cast-
name. Group cast-image and cast-name and call the group cast-member. Duplicate cast-
member five times and, with all five selected, use Auto Layout (Shift-A) with a
horizontal spacing of 24. Now, change the name of each cast-member and name this auto
layout cast-list.




Moving along, duplicate the section-header you created earlier. Change the text
to Ratings and place it below cast-list with a margin of 64.

To create the rating list, duplicate the cast-name and cast-image you created earlier.
Place the cast-image below the section-header with a margin of 24 from the top
and 16 from the left. Vertically align the cast-name to the image and place it at a margin
of 24 from the left.

Add a rating component and place it below cast-name at a margin of 8 from the top
and 24 from the left. Group the cast-name, cast-image and rating and name the
group review-list-item.

Next, duplicate review-list-item four times and, with all four selected, use Auto Layout
(Shift-A). Select Vertical from the auto layout properties and set Spacing Between
Items to 32.
Implementing the “Add to Watchlist” feature
The last missing piece on this screen is an option to add a movie to a watch list. To do
this, add a 382×58 rectangle (R) to the screen. Give it a black stroke and a fill
of #C4C4C4.

Now, add the text Add to Watchlist on a text layer (T) with a font of Roboto-
Medium and a font size of 24. Center the text on the rectangle and group the elements.
Name the group favorite-button and place it at the bottom of the screen with a margin
of 16 from the sides and bottom.




The cast and rating sections are distinguishable at this point, but there’s no grouping of
the actual movie information. You’ll add a backdrop to fix this.


Grouping the movie information
Start by adding a rectangle (R) measuring 379×590 with a corner radius of 8,
a black stroke and a fill of #F5F1F1. Call this rectangle backdrop and make it the last
layer on the Layers panel for this frame. Next, horizontally align it to the frame and
position it at a margin of 171 from the top.
Marking movies as seen
The last thing to do on this screen is to add the ability to mark a movie in the user’s
watchlist, as seen. This only requires you to add an extra state to the button.

Duplicate the movie-details-wireframe and change the button text to Mark as Seen.
Once done, you should have two states of the detail screen, as shown below.
The detail screen looks much better now. The sections of the screen are clearly separated,
which lets users quickly scan the information, and it offers controls to curate the user’s
watch list.

Great job with your first wireframe! You just completed one of the essential steps
towards building a great app. By going through the wireframing process, you built out the
core of what the app will feel like. Going forward, you have a strong foundation and a
clear idea of which use cases you’re catering to.

Ideally, wireframing is the stage where developers and designers come together to talk
out any engineering constraints that might come up during the final implementation. This
gives the designers a clear picture of the boundaries and limitations they should account
for.
Try getting involved in the wireframing process next time you work with your designers.
They’ll appreciate the early feedback and input, as it’s much easier to iterate and
incorporate changes at this stage, when the designs are still rudimentary.

In the next chapter, you’ll build on top of these wireframes and add real data to bring the
screens to life.




5
Reusable Elements & DataWritten by Prateek
Prasad
In the last chapter, you created wireframes for the app and established a well-thought-out
scaffold. These are essential steps in designing a product. Having set a general direction
for your team, you’ll now start working on the finer details by fleshing the screens out
with real data.

Among the more useful features in Figma are components, which you briefly touched
upon in the last chapter. Even without going into detail, having an overview of
components helped speed up the iteration.

In this chapter, you’ll take a closer look at components and how you can leverage them to
create flexible designs. More importantly, you’ll learn the value of reusability when
building designs — this chapter focuses specifically on building reusable components.
You’ll also learn how to better organize your components and their variations.



Visualizing when to use components
A common question when you start using components is: Which pieces of my screen
would benefit from being a reusable component? Frankly, it’s not a straightforward
question to answer.

A lot of this boils down to the idea behind the product and its complexity. The more
information your app surfaces, the more elements there are on the screen. But that’s not
all. If there are variations in how you surface similar information, you’ll end up with
more unique elements on your screen.

You might have noticed this with the app teardown exercises. Airbnb used just two
components to build the entire screen, whereas Pocketcasts used multiple design
variations to surface the same information. In both these apps, their underlying
information was similar, but how they surfaced it varied.
So how do you decide on the component breakdown? A neat trick is to visualize the
silhouette of the app. You did this in the teardown exercise. After tracing each screen,
you hid the screenshot to view the app structure. Hiding the specific information helped
you analyze how many components the screen uses.

Once you’ve built a wireframe of a screen, it’s easier to notice these details. In the future,
any time you use an element in more than one place with slight or no variations, you can
extract it out as a component.



Getting started
From the project files for this chapter, load chapter-5-starter.fig into Figma. You can
drag the file into the Figma window to import it.

Open the imported project. The file contains the movie list and movie details wireframes
along with the wireframe components.


Building the movie list item
Add a new Macbook frame (F) to the file. Name this frame Posters.
Add a movie-list-item component to this frame by copying the movie-list-
item component from the wireframe-components frame. Select the instance, right-click
and select Detach instance (Option-Command-B/Alt-Control-B).




Once you detach an instance from the main component, it stops behaving like an instance
that can receive style updates from the main component and starts acting like a regular
group. You’ll also notice the icon is no longer a diamond and the outline goes from
purple to blue.

Expand the movie-list-item group, select the movie-image, genre and rating instances
and detach them from their instance (Option-Command-B/Alt-Control-B)

Here’s how your Layers panel should look at this point:
Expand the movie-image layer and delete the diagonal lines. Select the rectangle and
remove the black stroke.




Next, select the movie-image frame and give it an Image fill.




The downloaded files come with a movie-images folder containing posters. Navigate to
the folder and select the birds-of-prey poster.
To finish, give the movie-image frame a corner radius of 4.




Customizing the text and fill color
Next, you’ll change the movie name to “Birds of Prey” and the weight to bold.




Now, select the individual genre items and give them a corner radius of 12.




Change the fill of the genre items to #DBDCB3.




Next, from the rating group, select the first four stars and change their fill to #B3C63F.
Great job! The list item is coming together nicely. For your final touch, select
the container layer and remove its stroke. Give it a white fill and a drop shadow
with X and Y values of 0, a Blur of 2, Spread of 1, and 25% opacity.




Your movie list item should look like this:




The list item you just created looks excellent, but it lacks the wow factor. One of the
things that are compelling about movies is how bold and expressive the posters are. These
posters subconsciously create an association with the film.

Think about “Toy Story” and tell me you don’t picture Woody and the gang. Think about
“Up”, and the first thing that comes to mind is Mr. Fredricksen and his house, floating
away. Imagery is critical in building an association with the brand.

Your goal in the next iteration is to amplify the movie posters.
Iterating on the movie list item
Add a rectangle (R) to the Posters frame measuring 414x263. Click the Fill option on the
Properties panel and select Image.




From the movie-images folder, pick the birds-of-prey poster. Now, click
the Fill options, select Crop to adjust the part of the poster that will be visible in the
rectangle and name this layer movie-image.




Add another rectangle (R) measuring 414x263 on top of the movie image and align it
horizontally and vertically. Give this layer a Linear Gradient fill.
Use a black color with an opacity of 8% for the left handle and a color of #111111 and an
opacity of 100% for the right handle. Call this layer backdrop-gradient. This layer will
make the text more readable.




Group the two layers (Command-G/Control-G) and call it Poster/Birds of Prey.
Duplicate the group six times. You’ll need to resize your frame to house all six instances.

Change the movie image for each instance, and follow the Poster/Movie Name naming
convention. You’ll come back to this naming convention shortly.

Make each group a component by selecting the group, right-clicking, and selecting
the Create Component option (Option-Command-K/Control-Alt-K).
Before moving forward, it’s time to do some housekeeping and tidy up your workspace.



Organizing with pages
If you keep creating multiple component frames on the same canvas, your workspace will
eventually get cluttered and difficult to navigate. It’s good practice to continuously tidy
up your workspace and organize it. As the Boy Scouts say, “Leave the campground
cleaner than you found it.”

To do so, you’ll use a handy feature in Figma called pages. Pages allow you to add a
layer of hierarchy in your design files by separating things into their own space.


Setting up your pages
On the Layers panel, click + to add a new page and call it Components.
If you can’t find the + button, collapse the Pages section by clicking the drop-down
option, as shown below:




Go back to Page 1 and rename it Cinematic App. Select the wireframe-
components and the Posters frame on this canvas, cut them (Command-X/Control-X)
and paste them into the Components page (Command-V/Control-V).

Add another page and call it Wireframes. Cut the movie-list-wireframe and movie-
details-wireframe from Cinematic App and paste them to Wireframes.

You now have three different pages to organize your designs and their related
components and iterations. Keeping components, wireframes and the actual designs in
separate pages makes your working design canvas tidier.

Next, add another Macbook frame (F) to your Components page and name it Movie
Card. Add the Birds of Prey poster component to this frame. Now, add a text layer (T)
to this frame with the text Birds of Prey. Use the font Roboto-Bold, font size of 24, and
text color to white. Place it at a margin of 79 from the top and 16 from the left. Name this
layer title.

Copy the movie-info layer from the movie-details-wireframe in the Wireframe page
and paste it below the title layer. Change the font color of the director, duration and year
text to white. Place the movie-info layer at a margin of 16 from the top and left, aligning
its left edge to the title.




Reusing and restyling components
You’ll now create the genre component. Instead of making it from scratch, you’ll reuse
the wireframe’s genres component and style it.

Create a new frame (F) measuring 250x50. Name this frame Genre and, in the Fill
section, change the fill to gray.

Now, click the Assets section in the Layers panel to view all the available components.




In the newly created Genre frame, add the genres component. Select the added instance,
right-click and chose the Detach Instance option (Option-Command-B/Alt-Control-B).




Expand the genres’ Auto Layout frame and select the three genre groups while
holding Shift to select them all at once.




Apply a corner radius of 10, remove the fill and add a white stroke of thickness 2.




Now, select the three text layers within each genre, give them a white fill and a letter
spacing of 1, then change the weight to bold. From the Text properties, click the Type
Details option represented by three dots. Under the Letter Case option, select Upper
Case.
Select the genres’ Auto Layout frame, right-click and make it a component by selecting
the Create Component option (Option-Command-K/Control-Alt-K).




Add the newly created genres component to the movie card and place it at a margin
of 32 from the bottom and 16 from the left of movie-info.




Creating the rating component
Moving along, it’s time to build the rating component. Add a new frame (F) to the canvas
measuring 250x50, give it a black fill and name it Rating.

The black fill makes the rating text visible and helps differentiate between different
components in the Assets section. Adding separate frames in the canvas for building each
component, as you’ve done so far, also helps consolidate the elements and their related
changes into their own section, keeping the Layers panel clean.

Add the rating component you created for the wireframe to this frame and detach it from
the instance (Option-Command-B/Alt-Control-B). Change the fill color of the first four
stars to #89E045 and rename the layer to stars.

Add a text layer (T) to the frame with the text 4.2 and place it at a margin of 16 from the
left. Use the font Roboto-Black, with a font size of 32 and a letter spacing of 1. Align it
vertically with the stars, separate them by 18 points horizontally and group the two,
calling it rating. Finally, make this group a component (Option-Command-K/Alt-
Control-K).
Add the newly created rating component to the movie card and place it below
the genres layer at a margin of 16 from the bottom of genres and 16 from the left. Group
the poster, title, movie info, genres and rating and call this group movie card.




Now, make the movie card group a component (Option-Command-K/Alt-Control-K).
You can also select the group, right-click and click the Create Component option.




Excellent job with your first fully-fleshed out component! Compared to the original
version, it’s much more appealing and vibrant. Adding the full-width images gives the
design more personality.
Placing the new component in a screen
It’s time to now use this component in a screen. Go to the Cinematic App page, add a
new iPhone 11 Pro Max frame (F) to this page and increase its height to 1578. Call the
frame movie-list.

Add a movie card component to the movie-list frame. To fill up the list, duplicate the
movie card component six times, then with all 6 cards selected, add a vertical Auto
Layout (Shift-A).




Make sure the vertical Auto Layout has no padding or spacing, as shown below.




Now, it’s time for some fun! All items in the list represent one movie, “Birds of Prey”.
You want to showcase multiple movies instead of the same one, over and over. To do so,
you’ll use the instance swapping ability of components.
Expand the second instance of the movie card component on the movie list frame, and
select the Poster/Birds of Prey component.




An instance menu will show up on the Properties panel on the right.




Clicking the Go to Main Component option, which has four diamonds as its icon, will
take you to the canvas that holds this component.
To go back to the instance you were previously working on, just click the handy Return
to instance option that appears at the bottom of your screen.




With Poster/Birds of Prey selected, click the name of the instance in the Instance section
and the Swap Instance menu will open with a drop-down of all your components. You
can view your components as a list or as a grid. You can even search for components by
name.
From the Swap Instance menu, under the Poster category, select Avengers Endgame to
swap the poster. Repeat the process of replacing the movie posters for the remaining
cards and change the movie names to reflect the posters you use.


Testing the power of components
You may notice an abnormality in all six instances after you rename the movie’s title:
The title text wraps over to the next line, overlapping with the movie info layer.
There’s a simple fix. Select one of the instances and click the Go to Main
Component option. Select the title layer and increase the width to 350. Click Return to
Instance option and your list should now look correct.




This is the power of components. Suppose this were a list of duplicated groups. To fix the
title’s width, you’d have to make the change on each card individually. Changing the
poster would also be a multi-step process that you’d have to perform six times. By
breaking your designs into components, you can make a one-time investment in
configuration and reap the benefits across your designs.

Your list looks great. It just needs bottom navigation and a status bar on top. But instead
of making them from scratch, you’ll see how to use third-party UI kits.



Exploring UI kits & plugins
When designing a product, it’s easy to get carried away and want to create everything
from scratch. While that’s always an option, it’s certainly not the most efficient one.

When developing apps, it’s helpful to focus on the app’s core business logic and use pre-
built APIs and libraries for lower-level things like networking, I/O, etc. You could write
the entire networking stack yourself, sure. But that has trade-offs, like the impact on the
release timeline and maintainability over time. The more abstractions you eliminate and
own yourself, the harder it gets to maintain them.

The same applies to design. There are only a few circumstances where it makes sense to
build simpler things, like icons, or platform-specific components, like dialogs and status
bars. For the vast majority of components, you can and should use a UI kit or plugin.
Doing so takes significantly less effort and lets you focus on more essential things like the
app’s core experience.

Figma has a lot of handy UI kits and plugins to make your life easier. You can find them
at https://figma.com/resources.


Using a design kit
For the iOS status bar, you’ll use a design kit.
Open https://www.figma.com/resources/assets/facebook-ios11-ui-kit/ in a different tab
and click Open the UI Kit in Figma. The Figma file will open in a new editor.
Note: Whenever you open a UI kit in Figma from the Figma resources, the file is copied over
to your Figma account. You’ll find it in your Drafts section.

Now, look for the Status Bar (iPhone X) frame in the Layers panel on the left, copy
the status bars/iPhone X/status bar/dark component and paste it at the top of
the movie-list.




Increase the width to 414 and constrain it to the top and horizontal center. Select the Fix
position when scrolling option to make sure it stays on top when you interact with this
screen as a prototype.
    Using an icon set
    For the navigation bar, you’ll use an icon set.

    Open https://www.figma.com/resources/assets/material-icons-fill/ and click the Open
    Icon Set in Figma button at the bottom.




    This file contains all of the icons that are part of the Material Design Icons suite. At the
    moment, you only need four icons so instead of copying over the entire set, just pick the
    ones you’ll use.

    Create a 150×50 frame (F) and call it Icons, then:

          From the Icons — Action frame, copy the bookmarks_24px icon.
          From the Icons — Image frame, copy the remove_red_eye_24px icon.
          From the Icons — Maps frame, copy the local_activity_24px icon.
          From the Icons — Social, copy the whatshot_24px icon.
Paste the icons mentioned above into your Icons frame.




Copy the Icons frame and paste it into your components page. Select each icon and make
it a component (Option-Command-K/Control-Alt-K).


Creating the navigation items
Add a new frame (F) measuring 450×90 and name it Bottom Navigation. Here, you’ll
place navigation to bring the user to three different types of movies to browse.

Start by adding a rectangle (R) to this frame measuring 414×56. Name this
layer background.

Give it a fill of white and a drop shadow with a blur of 2. Set all other values to zero.




Now, you’ll set up the navigation to trending movies. Add the whatshot_24px icon.
Now, add a text layer (T) with the text Trending. Give it a font size of 12 and a weight
of Roboto-Regular. Place the text below the icon at a margin of 2 from the top and align
their horizontal centers.

Select the icon and the text, give each a fill of #0045D0, group them (Command-
G/Control-G) and call the group icon. Add a new rectangle (R) measuring 120×56 and
name it item-bounds. Align it horizontally and vertically with the icon, group it again
(Command-G/Control-G) and name it trending. Place the trending group at a margin
of 25 from the left.
Next up are the top-rated movies. Duplicate the trending group and call it top-rated.
Change the icon to local_activity_24px by swapping the icon component as you did in
the previous section, then change the text to Top Rated. Change the icon and the text
color to #6D6E70 and make sure to fix the alignment after changing the text.

Finally, you’ll let the user view their watchlist. Repeat this process one more time, name
the group watchlist, swap the icon to bookmarks_24px, change the text
to Watchlist and, finally, change the icon and text color to #6D6E70.


Implementing the navigation bar
Now that you have the navigation bar looking the way you want, it’s time to use it in the
movie list.

Group the trending, top-rated and watchlist layers (Command-G/Control-G) and call the
group navigation-items. Select the background layer and the navigation-items layer,
right-click and select Frame selection (Option-Command-G/Alt-Control-G), and name
it bottom-nav.

For your final step, select the three item-bounds layers, remove their fill and make
the bottom-nav frame a component.




Return to your movie-list frame and add the bottom navigation component. Constrain it
to the bottom and horizontal center and select the Fix position when scrolling option.
Awesome job with the movie list! It looks really good and the app is starting to come
alive. Next, you’ll work on giving the movie details screen a similarly impressive look.



Designing the movie details screen
Moving along, it’s time to build the movie details screen. Add a new iPhone 11 Pro
Max frame (F) to the screen and name it movie-details. Increase the frame height
to 1680.

Add the Birds of Prey movie poster to this layer, then right-click and select Detach
instance (Option-Command-B/Control-B).

Increase the height of both the backdrop-gradient and the movie-image layers to 1107.
This distorts the image, so fix the problem by changing the image fill option
from Crop to Fill.
Drag to change the picture’s dimensions to 486×1207. Group the gradient and the picture
(Command-G/Control-G), name it backdrop and lock the layer to prevent accidental
changes.


Adding details to the background
Add a rectangle (R) measuring 414×1314 and place it at a margin of 366 from the top.
Give it a white fill and call it background-card.

Double-click on the background-card layer to enter Vector Edit mode. You’ll see
dashed lines on your layer at this point.




Select the top-right and the top-left corners of the rectangle and give them a corner radius
of 16.




Press the Escape key or the Done button to exit Vector Edit mode. Give this layer
a default drop shadow and lock it.
Adding the movie picture
Add a 157×221 rectangle (R) with a corner radius of 8. Place it at a margin of 16 from the
left and 323 from the top.




For the fill, select the Birds of Prey image from the movie-images directory and give it
a default drop shadow. Add a white stroke of width 5 to this layer and name it movie-
details-image.




Adding the details
Copy the title and movie info text layers from the movie-card component in the
Components page, then place them to the right of the movie-details-image with a margin
of 28 from the movie-details-image.

Change the title fill to black and give it a top margin of 36. Change the movie-info fill
to #827F7F and place it below the title with a margin of 16 at the top.
Add the genre component to the frame from the Assets section in the Layers panel and
place it below the movie-info layer. Give it a margin of 16 on the top and 28 on the left
from the movie-details-image. Select the individual genre and change the stroke from
white to #B9C95A.




Similarly, select the individual genre texts and change their fill from white to #B9C95A.




Group the title, movie-info and genre layers (Command-G/Control-G) and name the
group info. Here’s what it should look like
    At this point, you may wonder why the title and movie-info layers are not individual
    components or why you modified the genre component’s colors instead of creating a new
    component.

    Those are great questions, let’s address them up before proceeding further.


    When to use components
    You could have made the movie-info and title layers into components, but that wouldn’t
    have any added benefit. Even if they were components, you’d have to:

          Change their fill color.
          Change their positioning.

    For the genre component, you could have created a separate component with the new fill
    color, but doing so doesn’t add value because you’ll use that variant in only one place.

    Components shine when they’re reused. If you’re only going to use a variation once or
    twice, you’re better off using an override on an existing component by modifying its
    attributes.


    Setting up the overview
    Add a text layer (T) with the text Overview to the movie-details frame. Use Roboto-
    Bold as the font with a font size of 18. Place it below movie-details-image at a margin
    of 40 from the top and 16 from the left. Name this layer overview-header.
Add another text layer (T) for the movie overview. Place this layer below the overview-
header at a margin of 16 from the top and left side. Copy the text from movie-
overview.txt into this layer — you’ll find it in the project materials for this chapter.
Use Roboto-Regular as the font with size 12. Finally, name this layer synopsis.




Using masks
The synopsis text is way too long to show in its entirety on this screen. It would save
screen space and look cleaner if you show the first paragraph and allow the user to
expand to read more.

Another nifty Figma feature, masks, will help you do this.

Think of masks as a stencil placed on top of an existing layer. Only the part of the
background that’s within the stencil’s cutout region will be visible. You can achieve a
bunch of nifty effects using masks that would otherwise be pretty difficult.
Add a rectangle (R) measuring 380×174, place it behind the text and name
it background. The placement is essential to get this right.




Select both the synopsis and background layers and click the Mask button on the
toolbar (Control-Command-M/Control-Alt-M).




Alternatively, you can right-click while the layers are selected and select the Use as
Mask option.

This will clip the text and the rectangle’s icon on the Layers panel will change to a half-
moon.




It might not seem that impressive because you could have just copied a single paragraph
for the synopsis — but that would make the text static. Now that the mask height
influences the text length, you can show as much or as little of the text you want by
selecting the background layer and modifying its height.
Fading out the visible text
Now, you’ll sprinkle some visual flair over this layer by making the text paler as it
approaches the cut-off point.

To do this, add another rectangle (R) measuring 380×174 inside the mask group, right
above the synopsis. Name it gradient and give this layer a linear gradient. Instead of
dragging the handle across the layer, drag it to the center.




Give the left handle a white fill at 0% opacity and the right handle a white
fill at 100% opacity.




Making the cut-off text readable
For the final piece of the overview section, add a text field (T) and enter Read More. Use
the font Roboto-Bold with a font size of 12 and a letter spacing of 3px. Under the Type
Details option, use Upper Case for the letter casing.
Move this layer inside the mask group and place it above the gradient. Align it to the
bottom of the gradient layer and name the mask group overview-text.




Things are looking great! You’re finished with the overview section and ready to move
on to displaying the cast of the movie.



Adding the cast section
Next up, the cast section. Copy the overview-header and change the text to Cast. Place it
below the overview-text group at a margin of 32 from the bottom of the masked layer
and 16 from the left. Name it cast-header.

For the cast pictures, you’ll use a third-party plugin from Unsplash.


Installing and using a third-party plugin
Plugins are critical to a designer’s workflow. They help you automate your mundane and
repetitive workflows, saving time and letting you concentrate on things that are more fun.

You’ll be using the Unsplash plugin to populate the cast section with placeholder actor
photos.

Head to https://www.figma.com/@unsplash and install the Unsplash plugin.



Once you get an installation confirmation, head back into the editor and, below the cast
header, add an ellipse (O) measuring 70×70. Place it at a margin of 24 from the cast-
header and 16 from the left.
Duplicate this circle on the right at a margin of 16. Select the two circles and create an
Auto Layout frame.




Create a total of six instances of the circle in the frame by duplicating them.




Now comes the fun part. Select all the circles in the Auto Layout frame, right-click and
go to Plugins ▸ Unsplash.




From the pop-up, select Portrait. The circles will populate with actual images. Cool!




Adding the user ratings
For the user rating section header, repeat the same process as you used for the cast-
header and change the text to Ratings — 4. Place it below the cast-images at a margin
of 40 from the top and 16 from the left. Finally, name it ratings-header.

Add a rating component below the cast-images section, to the right of the ratings-
header. Change the dimensions to 208×38 and change the text color to #727272. Place it
at a margin of 32 from the top and 16 from the right.




Next, you’ll add details about the people who left the ratings. Add a 35×35 ellipse (O)
and place it below the ratings-header at a margin of 24 from the top and 16 from the left.
Name it user-image.

Add a text layer (T) to the canvas. Use a name and date of your choice as the text. Use the
font Roboto-Regular with a size of 12 and a fill of #727272. Place it below the ratings-
header at a margin of 24 from the top and 16 from the left of the user-image. Name
it username.




Add a rating component to the frame. Detach it from its instance (Option-Command-
B/Control-B), then delete the text layer with the 4.2 rating value.




Select the rating component on the canvas, right-click and select Ungroup.
Now, select the stars Auto Layout frame, right-click and select Ungroup.




Select the five individual stars in the layer panel, group it back and name the group stars.




Change the dimensions of the stars group to 86×12. Place them below the username layer
at a margin of 8 from the top and 16 from the user-image.




Change the fill color of the stars to #F1C644




Group (Command-G/Control-G) the user-image, username and stars and call the
group ratings-row.
Duplicate it vertically at a spacing of 16 using Auto Layout and then select all the user-
image layers and use the Unsplash plugin to populate the images. Name the Auto Layout
frame rating-list.




Adding movie recommendations to the details
For your next task, you’ll deviate a little from the mock-up. Wouldn’t it be nice to get
recommendations for other movies within the movie’s details screen? It would go a long
way toward increasing user engagement within the app.

Go back to the Components page and, on the Movie Card frame, duplicate the movie card
component and detach it from its instance (Option-Command-B/Control-B). Give it a
corner radius of 8 and select Clip content.




Select the frame, make it a component (Option-Command-K/Control-Alt-K), and rename
it movie card/rounded. To make it more convenient to swap instances, rename the non-
rounded variant to movie card/sharp. Resize the Movie Card frame to trim out any
unused white space.
Go back to the Cinematic App page and add a section header with the text You may also
like. Place it at a margin of 32 from the top and 16 from the left. Name
it recommendations-header.

Below the recommendations-header, add a movie card/rounded component. Use the
scale option to resize it to approximately 324×205. Place it at a margin of 16 from the top
and left.




Duplicate it three times horizontally with a spacing of 16, switch the movie posters as you
like and change the movie name. Name the row recommendations.




That’s a wrap! You’ve learned about components and how you can leverage them to
create flexible designs. More importantly, you learned the value of reusability when
building designs!
    Why not test your knowledge with the following challenge?



    Key points
         Organize components and designs using pages.
         Use compose components to build larger design elements and, when it makes
  sense, to create a component.
         Establishing naming conventions for components helps with instance swapping
  and logical grouping.
         The Figma community offers third-party icon sets and plugins to make your job
  easier.



    Challenge
    All you need to finalize this screen is the Add to Watchlist button, a Back button and the
    status bar. Instead of giving you instructions on creating these elements, I’ll leave that out
    as a challenge for you. Here’s what they should look like.




    If you get stuck, open chapter-5-final.fig and take a look at how it’s done there.

    Fantastic job building out the movie list and details screens! Your designs are already
    looking pretty good. While you’re still a few steps away from bringing the app to its final
    form, you should be proud of how far you’ve come.

    The next chapter will focus on even more nuanced details, like using typography and
    colors to establish a brand identity and consistency for the app. Till then!
