Designing in Figma
by Eugene Fedorenko
On the web: figmabook.com
Please send errors to hello@efedorenko.com
Version 1.1



Copyright © 2020 Eugene Fedorenko

All rights reserved. This book or any portion thereof may not be re-
produced or used in any manner whatsoever without the express writ-
ten permission of the publisher except for the use of brief quotations
in a book review.

Copyedited by Doug Warren
To Natalya and Alisa
Contents
INTRODUCTION	                       1   BUILDING A DESIGN SYSTEM	108

                                         •	 Components	           110
GETTING STARTED 	                  4
                                         •	 Styles	               126
•	 State of Design Tools	           5   •	 Team Library	         129
•	 Why Switch to Figma?	           7    •	 Version History	      136
•	 Browser vs. Desktop App	       10
•	 Figma Interface	                12   WORKING WITH DATA	       139
•	 Color Space	                    14
                                         CONCLUSION	              146
BASIC ELEMENTS	                    15

•	 Move Tools	                     17
•	 Shape Tools	                   19
•	 Vector Editing Toolset	        28
•	 Boolean Groups	                36
•	 Masks	                         38
•	 Fill, Stroke, and Effects	     40
•	 Text	                          57
•	 Exports	                       66

CREATING LAYOUTS	                 69

•	 Tidying Up and Smart Selection	 71
•	 Groups and Frames	             76
•	 Constraints	                   80
•	 Layout Grid	                   85
•	 Rulers and Guides	             92
•	 Auto Layout	                   94
•	 Pages	                        102
•	 Links	                        107
Introduction
Introduction                                                                                          2


My first attempt at using Figma was quite disappointing. After
scoring an invite to the closed beta in March 2016, I played
with it for half an hour. The way it worked in a browser was
impressive, but the app was too rough and buggy overall.

A year later, I gave it another try and was thoroughly im-
pressed by the progress the company had made. The whole
experience was much more polished. Still, I wasn’t ready to
use it for my work.

                                                                    https://twitter.com/efedorenko/
                                                                    status/856919804992684032




In 2018 Sketch was my primary design tool, but its ecosystem
and pay-per-computer pricing became annoying. Essential
parts of the workflow, like prototyping, commenting, and
handoff, required 3rd-party services, so things became less
reliable as there were too many moving parts. My colleague
and I split a large design project into multiple smaller files so
we could work on them independently without overwriting
each other’s changes. I also faced issues caused by working on
multiple Macs — app versions and plugins were getting out of
sync, I had to remember to save and close files before switch-
ing to a different computer, and files themselves had to be
stored in the cloud.

During all that time, I occasionally used Figma for random
illustrations and liked it more and more. Finally, at one point,
I imported all my Sketch files with dozens of screens for the
current project into Figma and committed to making it work.

Most people starting with Figma fall into one of two camps —
they are either switching from Sketch or are entirely new to
UI design. This book won’t teach you design and focuses only
on the app, but where appropriate, I try to discuss fundamen-
Introduction                                                       3


tals and best practices. The goal is to help you design effi-
ciently and achieve mastery of the tool.

When switching to Figma in 2018, I looked for a short and
concise manual that I could read in a couple of evenings, but
all I could find were basic introductions and long video cours-
es. They might work for some, but nothing beats a good man-
ual for me. There is just something special in compressing all
the knowledge about the topic or a tool into one book. When
done well, the manual can be an elixir of mastery.

To keep the book reasonably short, I focused only on the
design process and left prototyping and animations out of
scope. They are not as universally used as the design tools, of-
ten require external tools or services, and not easy to explain
in a written form. I may consider working on these topics sep-
arately in the future, but this is still up in the air.

I hope you’ll enjoy the book and learn something new from it!
Getting Started
Getting Started                                                                                      5



State of Design Tools
For a long time, Photoshop was the primary tool without any
serious competition. A few seasoned designers may recall
Fireworks as the first tool built for screen design, but person-
ally, I met only a few people who used it in the mid-2000s.
Adobe didn’t pay much attention to Fireworks after acquiring
Macromedia and eventually stopped development after the
last release in 2012.

That also was the year when the Sketch app, developed by
the Dutch company Bohemian Coding, won an Apple Design
Award. While still immature and a little buggy, it felt like a
breath of fresh air — the app was specially designed for the
needs of UI designers, worked blazingly fast, and felt light-
weight. Soon, there was a growing market of apps integrating
with it — Craft by InVision for prototyping, Zeplin for devel-
oper handoff, Abstract for version control, and a whole lot of     1  Brown CS Alum Evan Wallace
plugins addressing different needs.                                Has Been Named An INC 2019
                                                                   Rising Star
The beta version of Figma was released in 2015. The company        http://awards.cs.brown.
                                                                   edu/2019/11/11/brown-cs-alums-
was founded by Dylan Fields and Evan Wallace, who met at           dylan-field-and-evan-wallace-
Brown University 1. In 2012 Evan built a WebGL demo with a         named-inc-2019-rising-stars/
sphere in a pool of water that immediately made the power of
the new technology clear to them 2. They began with an idea        2  Interview with CEO of Figma,
                                                                   Dylan Field
of building a Photoshop-like app in a browser, but soon real-
                                                                   https://medium.com/blueprint/
ized that a mobile app would be a better place for working on      interview-with-figma-ceo-dylan-
photos that primarily were taken on smartphones.                   field-d9e05bbd9353
Getting Started                                                                                     6




                                                                 Evan Wallace, WebGL Water, 2011.
                                                                 © Figma

After completing several internships at major tech companies,
they got frustrated with the lack of cloud-based collabora-
tive tools for interface design and pivoted in this direction.
The whole focus on cloud-based technology and interactivity
made it a very appealing option both for individual designers
and teams looking to improve collaboration.

Today, there is a sizzling competition between Sketch, Ado-
be XD, Figma, and a few new contenders like InVision Studio
and Framer X. All of them are being actively developed, have
unique strengths, and provide smart solutions to difficult
problems. We can be picky with the options now, but just
a few years ago, we would have been happy with any one of
them.
Getting Started                                                        7



Why Switch to Figma?
Comparing apps feature-to-feature is a sure way to make this
chapter outdated very soon. (Figma and Sketch ship updates
every few weeks, and other competitors are not far behind.)
Instead, I’ll highlight common reasons among teams switch-
ing to Figma.


ENHANCED COLLABORATION

Collaborating in Figma compared to other design tools is like
working together in Google Docs compared to editing a Word
file in a shared folder. Sure, you can take turns editing and
communicate back and forth to avoid overwrites, but the mo-
ment you see multiple cursors working together on the same
document in real-time, there is no going back. Between col-
laborating on the same screens with other designers, sharing
clickable prototypes with shareholders, and having discus-
sions in comments, there is not much more to wish for.


POWERFUL COMPONENTS

I believe Figma has the most powerful implementation of re-
usable components. The system of instance overrides is really
flexible and includes size, visibility, styles, text, and even nest-
ed components. This dramatically reduces the need to detach
instances from the main component. All of that will be dis-
cussed later in the book.

I also prefer the granular sharing of components from individ-
ual documents compared to global Libraries in Sketch. This
provides more flexibility when building a design system, im-
proves organization, and reduces the number of components
available in every individual document.
Getting Started                                                                                       8


BUILT-IN DEVELOPER HANDOFF

Zeplin, Inspect Mode in InVision, Avocode, Sketch Measure
plugin — there are tons of 3rd-party tools for passing assets
and style-guides from designers to developers, but all of them
require maintenance and syncing. Figma’s approach is more
straightforward — invite developers to your account with
view-only access, and they can reference code snippets and
copy assets straight from your original design system. Fewer
moving parts is better.


BUILT-IN PROTOTYPING

InVision used to be a go-to app for creating and sharing click-
able prototypes, but in 2018 Sketch added their own built-in
solution 3. Still, most people prefer Figma’s approach when       3 An in-depth look at Prototyping
                                                                  in Sketch
designs are always in the cloud, and there is nothing to upload
                                                                  https://blog.sketchapp.com/an-
before sharing.                                                   in-depth-look-at-prototyping-in-
                                                                  sketch-942394341f3c


PRICE

Figma’s free plan is very generous and probably explains why
more than 80% of its active users are currently outside the
United States 4. Being browser-based and free for personal        4  Made in Figma, 2019: Design by
                                                                  the numbers
use makes it a fantastic choice for beginners and designers
                                                                  https://www.figma.com/blog/made-
in developing nations, which is uncommon for a high-quality       in-figma-2019/
professional app. Most people will need to upgrade only when
they ran out of projects, start using it with a team, or decide
to build a shareable item library of components.

Even while the monthly subscription cost for Figma, Sketch,
and Adobe XD is in the same ballpark, most teams won’t need
3rd-party services like InVision, Zeplin, or Abstract anymore
and could significantly reduce the total cost.
Getting Started                                                                                     9


MULTI-PLATFORM

As Figma lives in a browser, it works on all major platforms,
including Chromebook! Recent updates to iOS and Figura-              5  https://figurative.design

tive 5 app make it usable on an iPad as well, but there is no
official support yet. This is huge for teams where people may
be using multiple platforms and can still collaborate and ac-
cess files.

As you may notice, the majority of the reasons to switch are
related to Figma’s browser-based architecture one way or
another. I believe this is a disruptive innovation in action.
While other apps are trying to catch up with their cloud-based
collaborative tools, most feel like a hack built on top of classic
apps. It’s similar to tweaking and optimizing a combustion
engine, while other manufacturers are shipping electric cars.
Getting Started                                                                                        10



Browser vs. Desktop App
Figma’s biggest selling point is that it is a browser-based col-
laborative design tool. It’s great that team members don’t
need to install a new app to review designs, comment, or
check values during implementation. But if you’re spending
significant time in the app, at the very least ensure that your
browser is properly configured 6 and install an official Font       6 Configure your browser for
                                                                    Figma
Installer 7 to make local fonts available in the app.
                                                                    https://help.figma.com/hc/en-us/
                                                                    articles/360039828614-Configure-
Better yet, just use their desktop app if you’re on macOS or        your-browser-for-Figma
Windows. Here are a few reasons to do this:
                                                                    7  Figma Downloads
                                                                    https://www.figma.com/downloads/
•	 Access to local fonts without running a system service.
•	 Ability to work in an Unmanaged color space.
•	 Figma works best in Chrome, but if you primarily use anoth-
   er browser, there is no need to run Chrome just for Figma.
•	 The app is optimized for and the most stable in the version
   of Chromium used in the latest desktop app.
•	 The desktop app preloads editor in the background, so new
   file creation is much faster.
•	 More flexibility when exporting assets, as the browser can’t
   save multiple files at once and has to archive them.
•	 Browser interface doesn’t take up valuable screen real estate.
•	 You can open multiple windows of the app (Shift-Com-
   mand-N on Mac or Shift-Ctrl-N on Windows). This comes
   handy when you have multiple displays or working on the
   same file at different zoom levels.

My only gripe with the desktop app is its two inconsistent
menus, one on the system level and another in the app, but
this is only a minor annoyance. Besides this, there is no rea-
son to use Figma in the browser, if you can use the app. To
make sure that all links to files will open in the right place,
                                                                    8 Open Figma links in the Desktop
enable Preferences → Open Links in Desktop App item in the
                                                                    App
menu. 8                                                             https://help.figma.com/hc/en-us/
                                                                    articles/360039824334-Open-
                                                                    Figma-links-in-the-Desktop-App
Getting Started                                                                                      11


If you’re feeling brave, Figma provides a beta version of the
app with features that haven’t been released yet. It may not be
stable, but you can try it by downloading from the help arti-     9  Beta version of the Desktop App
                                                                  https://help.figma.com/hc/en-us/
cle 9.
                                                                  articles/360039823654-Download-
                                                                  the-Figma-Desktop-App#Beta_
                                                                  version_of_the_Desktop_App
Getting Started                                                    12



Figma Interface
Just so we’re on the same page when it comes to Figma’s in-
terface, let’s review it and name its different areas.




On the very top of the Desktop App, a Tab Bar provides ac-
cess to the File Browser (the Figma logo), open documents in
tabs, and a button to create a new file. When using Figma in a
browser, a Tab Bar is not displayed as only one document can
be open in a browser tab.

The File Browser shows all your projects and files, which may
be viewed in a grid or list view and opened by double-clicking.
The plus icons in the Tab Bar and the sidebar create a new
draft, while the one in the top-right corner of the File Browser
creates a new file in the open project. You can also import a
Sketch file using the Import icon in the top-right corner of the
File Browser, or File → New from Sketch File… in the “ham-
burger” dropdown menu.




When viewing a file, there is a Toolbar that has a button for
opening a “hamburger” menu, a panel of tools, the file name
in the center with actions dropdown, and viewing, sharing,
and presenting options on the right. The content of the Tool-
bar changes based on what you have selected on the canvas.
A search for menu options can be quickly opened with Com-
mand-/ shortcut.

The Layers Panel on the left can be toggled with Command-|
shortcut. If you have multiple expanded groups or frames,
they all can be collapsed with Option-L shortcut. This panel
also includes Pages and Assets.
Getting Started                                                                                   13


Properties Panel on the right changes based on a current selec-
tion and includes Design, Prototype, and Inspect tabs. Both
panels and toolbar can be hidden with the Command-\ short-
cut, which is convenient if you’re working with a large mock-
up on a small laptop screen.

The main area in the middle of the screen is Canvas. Its back-
ground color can be changed in the Properties panel. Zoom
level can be changed with a few nifty keyboard shortcuts; if
you have Use Number Keys for Opacity enabled in the Prefer-
ences menu, hold Shift to access zooming shortcuts:

•	 0 for zooming to 100%
•	 1 for fitting all your content on a screen
•	 2 for zooming to selection

The shortcut I often use to place selection in the center of the
screen is Zoom to Selection (2), followed by Zoom to 100% (0).
This can also be achieved by double-clicking on a layer icon in
the Layers panel.




Help → Keyboard Shortcuts (or Control-Shift-?) is a great
way to learn Figma’s keyboard shortcuts. They are nicely or-
ganized, and shortcuts you’ve previously used are shown in
blue — this way it’s easier to see what you’re missing out on.     10 Create keyboard shortcuts for
Keep in mind that other apps may have global shortcuts in          apps on Mac
                                                                   https://support.apple.com/guide/
conflict with Figma. While Figma doesn’t allow customizing         mac-help/create-keyboard-
shortcuts, you can create custom shortcuts on Mac 10 or use        shortcuts-for-apps-mchlp2271/mac
3rd-party apps like Keyboard Maestro 11 for reassigning them.      11  Keyboard Maestro
                                                                   https://www.keyboardmaestro.com
Getting Started                                                                                         14



Color Space: sRGB vs. Unmanaged
If you want colors to look consistent across your Figma files,
exported images, and browsers, you need to pay attention to
color management. It’s a vast topic with volumes dedicated to
it, so I’ll only discuss the bare minimum relevant to Figma.

Every device that can capture or display an image has a color
space describing a range of colors that can be represented in
an image. sRGB is a default or “least common denominator”
standard from 1996 used by a large number of devices and
applications. If you have a recent display or laptop, chances
are it may have a wider color gamut than sRGB. For example,
most devices made by Apple since 2015 have a Display P3 col-
or space, which can show 25% more colors than sRGB.

Figma in the browser is limited to a universal sRGB color
space, but the desktop app can be set to use your display’s
color space by selecting Color Space → Unmanaged in Figma
application menu. That puts you into a dangerous situation:

•	 Colors may appear differently for your team members.
•	 Colors may appear differently between your computers.
•	 Regardless of your color space, all assets will be exported in
   the sRGB.
•	 Every single color format in CSS is in sRGB 12.                  12  https://twitter.com/LeaVerou/
                                                                    status/1220030443069878282
While it’s exciting to design with the whole spectrum of col-
ors a wide gamut display can show, there is no practical rea-
son to do this until Figma supports color profiles in exports.
It can be really disappointing to carefully pick colors in Figma
only to see them washed out when exported or applied to the
web page. Therefore, make sure that your desktop app’s color
space is set to sRGB.
Basic Elements
Basic Elements                                                    16


A journey of a thousand miles begins with a single step, while
the design of any app starts with basic elements. In this sec-
tion, we’ll review all tools at our disposal in Figma’s toolbar
and Properties panel. If you think that basic tools like an el-
lipse or a pen can’t be different from any other design app,
you’ll be surprised.
Basic Elements                                                      17



Move Tools

MOVE TOOL (V)

Move Tool (shortcut V) lets you select, move, and transform
objects. Select one object by clicking on it, or multiple objects
by holding Shift while making the selection. An object can be
excluded from the selection by clicking one more time while
holding Shift.

You can also select multiple objects by holding the left mouse
button and dragging to create a selection area containing the
objects you want to select. If you start the selection in the
wrong place, you can move it before the left mouse button is
released by holding the Space bar key.

Hold Command (Ctrl on Windows) while clicking to select
an object nested anywhere inside a group or frame (“deep
select”), or double-click to select an object one level deeper.
We’ll talk about navigating groups and frames in more detail
later in the book.

The selected object shows a blue bounding box and dimen-
sions. To measure the distance between the two objects, se-
lect one of them and hold the Option (Alt on Windows) key
while hovering the cursor over another. The distance will
show temporarily in red. The Option key is also used for du-
plicating objects — hold it and drag an object to make a copy.

While the object is selected with the Move Tool, it can be re-
sized or rotated. Drag a side or a corner square of the bound-
ing box to resize an object. Hold the Shift key to constrain
proportions while resizing. Move the cursor slightly outside a
corner square (or press the Command while over it) to rotate
the object.

This is not widely known, but objects can be resized from a
keyboard. Select an object and use a combination of Com-
mand (Ctrl on Windows) and the arrow keys to change the di-
Basic Elements                                                     18


mensions one pixel at a time. Hold Shift to change it by 10 pix-
els, which is a default “big nudge” value that can be changed
in Preferences → Nudge Amount. Useful if you need to tweak
the size just a little bit.


SCALE TOOL (K)

While it may seem that a separate Scale Tool is excessive,
considering the possibilities of the Move Tool, there is a sig-
nificant difference between them. Move Tool resizes objects
while keeping their strokes and effects intact, while Scale
Tool will scale them proportionally. It also works for frames,
groups, components, instances, and text objects that may be
resized but not scaled with Move Tool. We’ll talk more about
resizing in a chapter on Constraints.
Basic Elements                                                    19



Shape Tools
Figma groups multiple tools for creating basic shapes under
the Shape Tools menu in the toolbar. These tools include
Rectangle, Ellipse, Line, Arrow, Polygon, Star, and Image.




Some of the tools use common modifiers to change their be-
havior:

•	 Hold down the Shift key while dragging a cursor to create
   perfect squares, circles, polygons, and stars.
•	 Hold down the Option key (Alt on Windows) to create or
   resize the shape from the center instead of from the corner.
   This applies to all Shape Tools.
•	 Shift and Option can be combined to create a shape from
   the center with all sides of the same length.
•	 After you press the left mouse button and start dragging a
   cursor to create a shape, hold the Space bar key to tempo-
   rarily move the shape without stopping the creation pro-
   cess.
Basic Elements                                                     20


RECTANGLE TOOL (R)

Rectangle Tool is used for recreating rectangles and squares.
The keyboard shortcut for the tool is the R key.

Corners can be rounded by specifying a radius in the Inspec-
tor section of the Properties panel. The values can be set indi-
vidually for each corner by clicking on the Individual Corners
icon. The order of the inputs conveniently matches the short-
hand property border-radius in CSS — top left, top right, bot-
tom right, and bottom left.

Alternatively, you can set a radius with a mouse by hovering
over a selected rectangle and moving any of the four circle
handles inside it towards the center. To set corner radius indi-
vidually, hold Option (Alt on Windows) while dragging. If your
rectangle already has individually set corner radiuses, holding
Option will revert the action and set a unified value.




Corner Smoothing is somewhat buried inside the Individual
Corners section. It’s an interesting and unique feature shared
by multiple tools and will be described in detail at the end of
this chapter.


ELLIPSE TOOL (O)

Ellipse Tool (O key) may seem like the dullest tool in the
menu until you discover Arc Tool used for the creation of ad-
ditional shapes like pie charts, rings, and broken rings.
Basic Elements                                                     21


After drawing an ellipse or a circle (with the Shift key), hover
over it, and a single Arc handle will appear on the right-hand
side. By dragging it up or down, you can create a gap in the
circle and change the Sweep measured in percentages. When
that is done, you’ll have three handles — an already familiar
Sweep, Start handle controlling where the arc begins, and
Ratio handle at the center allowing you to change the circle to
the ring.




To make a closed ring, you will need first to drag an Arc han-
dle to create a pie, then drag Ratio handle to the desired size
for the ring, and finish off by moving the Sweep handle to
meet the Start position and close the ring.


LINE TOOL (L)

Line tool (L key) lets you create lines in any direction. You
can hold Shift while dragging to create a line at a 45° or 90°
angle.

It’s better to use a basic Line Tool for drawing simple lines
instead of a more powerful Pen Tool because of its adjustable
properties. The line created with a Line Tool is recorded as a
starting point, length, and angle, while line created with a Pen
Tool is recorded as two points in a plane. Any property of the
former can be changed later, while the latter can be scaled or
rotated only based on its bounding box. It may sound a lit-
tle confusing, but hopefully, the illustration and a chapter on
Vector Tools will make it clearer.
Basic Elements                                                     22




The line created with a Line Tool is recorded as 300 pixels
long at 45 degrees.




The line created with a Pen Tool is recorded as a square ob-
ject with two connected points. The object can be scaled or
rotated, but the line’s properties like angle or length can’t be
changed directly.
Basic Elements                                                     23


ARROW TOOL (SHIFT-L)

The tool that shouldn’t exist and probably was added only to
bring visibility to the feature. It’s pretty simple — you create
a line, and its endpoint is displayed as an arrow. The arrow’s
size depends on a stroke width, which can be inconvenient if
you’re looking to create a thin but large arrow.

Why shouldn’t it exist? Any line created with a Line Tool or
Pen can be converted into a line with an arrow in Advanced
Stroke properties. If you pick Line Arrow or Triangle Arrow as
a Cap, both ends will be turned into arrows. If only one end-
point should have an arrow, you’ll need to select a line, click
Edit Object button in context toolbar, select the point, and
then pick its Cap. This way, you can even create a line with
two different arrows on the ends.




POLYGON

Polygons can have any number of sides between 3 and 60. The
count can be changed either in the Inspector or by selecting a
polygon, then dragging a circle handle on one of the corners.
Basic Elements                                                                                            24


The bounding box of a polygon extends beyond the shape
itself to keep the size consistent when the number of sides is
changed. It can be snapped to the shape’s true boundary by
flattening (either right-click on the polygon and select Flatten
or press Command-E on Mac or Ctrl-E on Windows). Keep in
mind that at this moment, the polygon converts into a vector
shape, and the number of sides can’t be changed anymore.

A single value for the corner radius can be set either by en-
tering it into the Inspector field or dragging a circle handle
inside a polygon. At first glance, it appears that setting an in-
dividual corner radius is not supported, but in editing mode,
it can be set for any number of selected points. (Hold Shift to
select multiple points.) Editing mode for any vector shape can
be entered by double-clicking on an object, pressing the Re-
turn on the keyboard, or clicking Edit Object in the toolbar.


STAR

Properties of the Star Tool are very similar to the Polygon
Tool, because technically star is a type of non-convex poly-
gon 1. There are two primary differences:
                                                                    1  Star polygon
1.	 Stars are defined by a number of points instead of sides, so
                                                                    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Star_
    a default 5-pointed star has 10 sides.                          polygon

2.	The Ratio is the distance of the inner points of the star
   from the center. It’s defined as a percentage of the star’s
   overall diameter.

Just as in polygons, corner radius can be set as a unified value
for the shape or individually for each corner.


PLACE IMAGE (SHIFT-COMMAND-K)

It may not be obvious what images have to do with the Shape
Tools menu until we see how they are implemented in Figma.
Both vector and raster images can be placed, but they work
differently.
Basic Elements                                                     25


Vector images placed from SVG become a new frame with fully
editable vector shapes. If you’re into web development, there
is a neat trick for copying SVG from an editor or a web page
straight to Figma. In an editor or a browser’s Inspector, select
an SVG code and copy it to the clipboard. Now it can be pasted
straight to Figma without saving to a file.




SVG code in a browser’s Inspector.


Raster images (PNG, JPEG, GIF, TIFF, and WEBP) are supported
as one of the types of the shape’s Fill. When you place a raster
image, a rectangle shape matching the image’s original size is
created, and the image is applied as its Image Fill. This imple-
mentation provides the flexibility of dragging an image file on
top of any shape’s Fill section to create a custom-shaped il-
lustration. That explains why Place Image is part of the Shape
Tools menu.

One common problem is that by default, raster images are
placed in their non-retina size. This is easy to fix thanks to
Figma’s smart input fields. Make sure that Constrain Prop-
erties is enabled and use width or height field as a calculator.
Basic Elements                                                     26


For example, if the original width was 250, change it to 250/2
and press Return. Both properties will recalculate automati-
cally. Alternatively, you can enter 50% or any other percent-
age value. Other math operations are supported as well, so
experiment with them!

If you need less precision, scrubbing a numeric field can be
worth trying. Try hovering over a field label until the cursor
changes to an arrow, then click and move it to increase or de-
crease the value.


WHAT IS CORNER SMOOTHING?

Back in 2013, Apple released iOS 7, where square app icons
with rounded corners were replaced with squircles. To an
untrained eye, they may look the same, but squircles have a
much smoother curvature, like if a regular rounded corner
was finished with sandpaper to smooth over the part where
the rounding begins. The shape looks more natural, resem-
bling a river pebble or a half-used bar of soap. Unsurprisingly,
they are pretty common in industrial designers — just look at
smooth corners of a MacBook or an iPhone.




Regular rounded corners vs. squircles
Basic Elements                                                                                       27


Figma wanted to meet the needs of designers looking to use
squircles in their projects. They couldn’t just smooth over all
rounded corners, as that would make any implementation on
the web using border-radius CSS property look too different
from a design mockup. Instead, they added a Corner Smooth-
ing slider that softly changes curvature from a regular round-
ed corner to squircles, with a special mark at 60% that closely
matches iOS style.

Generally speaking, it’s better not to use Corner Smoothing
for web projects at all, set it to iOS mark for projects designed
for that platform, and use maximum smoothing in illustra-
tions and icons that will be exported as an image. If you want
to learn more about squircles, check out Figma’s very detailed      2  https://www.figma.com/blog/
and math-heavy blog post “Desperately seeking squircles” 2.         desperately-seeking-squircles/



BLOBS

Sometimes standard shapes aren’t enough, and that’s where
plugins help. Blobs by Dylan Feltus creates unique blob
shapes based on the specified complexity of the shape. Pretty
cool and versatile.
Basic Elements                                                                                      28



Vector Editing Toolset
When Figma founders set to build the Pen Tool without a pri-
or design background, they got surprised at how unintuitive
it was in other apps 3. Some of the limitations were dragged       3  Introducing Vector Networks
                                                                   https://medium.com/figma-design/
from the early days of design tools and didn’t really make
                                                                   introducing-vector-networks-
sense anymore. They rethought the tool from the ground up          3b877d2b864f
and came up with one of the most unique parts of Figma —
Vector Networks. At first glance, vector editing in Figma works
just as in all other apps, but the extra powers are just sitting
there waiting to be discovered.


PEN TOOL

A Vector Network consists of paths. Each path is a chain of
linked lines and curves from one endpoint to the other. Lines
are defined by starting and ending points, while Bézier curves
have additional control points to define their curvature. In
most drawing tools, each point can have either one or two
paths coming off it. In Figma, any number of paths can
come off one point. That reduces the number of individual
objects and allows much faster creation of complex shapes
within the same object and with the same properties.




A single vector network object.
Basic Elements                                                     29


The Pen is the primary tool for working with vector networks
in Figma. Every click creates a new point connected to the
path with the straight line. To curve a line, click and drag the
control point of a Bézier curve out of the point. To continue
from a different point, press Esc to drop the connection, se-
lect an existing point or add a new one, and continue building
a path from it.

While working on a path, you can temporarily access extra
tools by pressing modifier keys. Clicking on any point with
Option (Alt on Windows) will remove it. Holding Shift will
help create a line at 45° or 90° angles. (There is also a red
line showing up automatically whenever your cursor is on the
same line as another point.) Holding Command (Ctrl on Win-
dows) turns on a Bend Tool.


PENCIL TOOL (SHIFT-P)

The Pencil is a tool for freeform drawing — you hold the but-
ton down and draw, while all the points and curves are cre-
ated automatically. The resulting path can be edited later in
vector editing mode. Pencil can be useful while working on
illustrations, but in general, it’s less precise than Pen Tool.

Having Wacom or another pen tablet on hand makes it more
useful. If you have an iPad and Apple Pencil, the Figurative
app makes Figma entirely usable on it even without official
support. Whatever tool you use, I recommend installing Pen-
cil Pal plugin that lets you choose both fill and stroke before
drawing with a pen.


VECTOR EDITING MODE

As you might have noticed, while using the Pen Tool, the app
enters vector editing mode and the standard toolbar is re-
placed with an editing toolbar. This mode is used for editing
any vector object created with Drawing Tools, Shape Tools, or
placed from an external vector file. To enter it, select an ob-
Basic Elements                                                                                      30


ject and double-click it, or press the Return key, or click Edit
Object button in the toolbar.

While in Vector Editing mode, you can select a point and hold
the Option key (Alt on Windows) to see the distance to other
points on hover. Precise measurements between points work
exactly the same as measurements between objects.


BÉZIER CURVES

Bézier curves were first invented over half a century ago for
designing the bodywork of French cars. In modern vector
design tools, they are used for creating precisely controlled,
scalable, and smooth curves that can be combined into paths.
They are also used in animations and motion graphics, but
this is off-topic. There are different types, but vector tools in
general and Figma in particular use cubic Bézier curves.

Bézier curves are manipulated by handles 4 that extend from         4  The Bézier Game is a good way
                                                                    to learn theory through practice.
the endpoints. At the end of each handle is the control point.
                                                                    https://bezier.method.ac
By moving the control point, the shape of the curve can be
changed.




The curve starts at the endpoint and gets (almost magneti-
cally) attracted to the handle control point coming out of it.
It ends at the second endpoint, attracted to its own control
point. The length of handles and their direction determines
how far and how sharply the curve bends.
Basic Elements                                                      31


Paths with Multiple Points
We covered a single curve between the two points, but most
paths consist of multiple points. As such, if point connects
two curves into a single path, there may be two handles ex-
tending from it — one for each curve. Let’s go through all pos-
sible scenarios.

The point connecting two straight lines will have no handles
because there are no Bézier curves in this path.




If one of the lines is turned into a Bézier curve (let’s say with
Bend Tool), there will be only one handle coming out of the
connecting endpoint to control the curvy part of the path.




If both parts of the path consist of curves, the connecting
endpoint will have two handles to control parts of both
curves.
Basic Elements                                                    32


Handles Mirroring
The last case with two handles on the endpoint is worth
pausing at. The two handles can have different types of re-
lationships that will form various curves and angles — from
sharp-angled to silky-smooth. Select the endpoint, and you
can see a dropdown with mirroring options in the Vector sec-
tion of Properties panel.



No Mirroring sets both handles acting completely inde-
pendently of each other. This is the best option if you want to
create an obvious angle or corner in your path. Alternatively,
this option is handy if you want to get rid of one of the han-
dles — select the control point and press the Delete key.



Mirror Angle is used for building a smooth Bézier curve
without a visible angle, as in the previous option. The handles
are placed at 180° to each other and form a single line but can
have a different length. This is useful when the curve needs to
taper off differently on one of the sides.



Mirror Angle and Length is the best method for building a
completely smooth Bézier curve. Not only are both handles
at the same angle, but they also have the same length. If you
were creating an ellipsis or a sine wave with a Bézier curve,
that would be the right tool for the job.
Basic Elements                                                     33


Best Practices
•	 Try to reduce the number of points in your path to a min-
   imum. The fewer points there are, the smoother the path
   will be.




•	 Place endpoint on the outermost point of the curve instead
   of stretching it with handles.




•	 One common approach is to place handles only horizon-
   tally or vertically with the Shift key pressed. It works best
   in combination with the previous recommendation. Not a
   universal rule, but limiting the number of variables in the
   process usually increases work speed.
Basic Elements                                                      34


DIRECT MANIPULATION AND BENDING

Direct manipulation of paths and vector networks is possi-
ble as an alternative to precise adjustments by moving points
and adjusting control handles. Any section of the path can be
selected and dragged around in edit mode, and all connected
paths will be moved accordingly.

There is also a Bend Tool (to which you can switch temporar-
ily with Command or Ctrl shortcut key) that manipulates the
curve directly without touching individual control points.


COLOR FILL

Figma’s move from the familiar concept of enclosed paths to
vector networks put their tools for filling areas with color on
steroids as well. It starts by automatically filling all enclosed
space, but provides Paint Bucket (B) tool for granular control
over which sections should or shouldn’t be filled.
Basic Elements                                                    35


CORNER RADIUS

Another nice touch is that Corner Radius (and even Corner
Smoothing!) is available for vector networks and custom
shapes. Rounding gets applied only to corners between two
lines at straight endpoints without handles. An individual
value can be set for every corner in edit mode. Behind the
scenes, Figma creates its own set of Bézier curves for a round-
ed corner. To make them visible and editable, you can Flatten
the path, which will be covered in the next chapter.
Basic Elements                                                     36



Boolean Groups
Shape Tools and the vector editing toolset provide a power-
ful way to create shapes, but sometimes they are not enough.
That’s when Boolean Group operations come into play and
offer multiple ways to unite or subtract shapes. They require
two or more layers and produce a special boolean group with
resulting shape and shared fill and stroke properties.

The operations are in the Boolean Groups dropdown in the
contextual part of the toolbar. It appears only when more
than one shape is selected.

There are four Boolean Groups operations:

•	 Union combines the selected shapes. The overlapping
   shapes will be combined into a shape based on all shapes’
   outer path and excluding all the segments that overlap.
•	 Subtract is the opposite of the Union. The overlapping
   shapes will be cut out from the shape in the bottom selected
   layer.
•	 Intersect creates a boolean group whose shape consists
   only of the overlapping segments of the selected shapes.
•	 Exclude is the opposite of Intersect and creates a shape
   only from the segments that do not overlap (as if you sub-
   tracted the Intersect shape from the Union shape.)




Union and Subtract operations get used the most, although
Intersect and Exclude can be occasionally useful as well. Sub-
tract is the only one where the order of the layers matters. All
the operations are non-destructive, so the boolean group can
be ungrouped later, and participating shapes can be edited or
moved as long as the group wasn’t flattened.
Basic Elements                                                      37


FLATTEN SELECTION (COMMAND-E)

Flattening converts the selection into a single vector shape,
while destroying information about individual shapes, bool-
ean groups, and rounded corners. It may sound undesirable,
but there are a few valid reasons to want this:

•	 After applying a Boolean Group operation to shapes, you
   may want to manually edit intersection points or Bézier
   curves on a resulting path.
•	 Before exporting the shape into SVG, you may flatten it to
   delete a few extraneous vector points and reduce file size.
•	 If you’re going to rotate the shape, but don’t want its direc-
   tional styling to be rotated as well. As an example, think of
   linear gradients or drop shadows.
•	 The bounding box of a Polygon or Star extends beyond the
   shape itself and affects the alignment of elements.

Flattening is a highly destructive action, so it’s worth keeping
in mind two things:

•	 Rounded corners will be converted to Bézier curves. Some-
   times it’s a good idea to flattened the shape before applying
   rounded corners to it.
•	 Backup your work! Duplicate and hide layers you are go-
   ing to flatten, just in case you’ll need to come back to them
   later.
Basic Elements                                                     38



Masks
An outline mask, also known as a clipping mask, is a shape
that only reveals content within its boundaries. It’s similar to
looking through a cutout on a sheet of paper — there are lots
to see around, but your view is limited to the shape of the cut-
out. If you move your cutout (or mask), a different part of the
view will be revealed.




Two masks reveal different parts of the same group of shapes.


Any shape, group, or boolean group can be turned into a mask
by clicking “Use as Mask” (Control-Command-M) button in
the toolbar, or right-clicking on the layer and selecting the
same command from the context menu. A new group with a
masked shape will be created. The mask will apply to all layers
above it in that group.
Basic Elements                                                      39


In addition to outline masks, Figma also supports alpha
masks in imported raster images. Only PNG may have an al-
pha channel, so it’s the only supported format. Unlike outline
masks that use shape, alpha masks use the per-pixel opacity
of the raster image. This creates some cool possibilities, like
masking an image with a gradient.




Alpha mask.


Keep in mind that raster images are not as scalable as vectors,
so if enlarged, they could have visible artifacts. On this image,
it’s easy to tell the difference between vector shapes and an
alpha mask boundary.




Raster artifacts.
Basic Elements                                                     40



Fill, Stroke, and Effects
Objects can be filled with colors and gradients, outlined with
strokes, and decorated with various effects. Let’s give the op-
tions a close look.


FILL

By default, objects are filled with an opaque solid color, but
can have multiple fills of different paint types — solid colors,
gradients, and images. Every fill is treated as a separate lay-
er and may have its own transparency level and blend mode.
Default fill and stroke can be changed by selecting a layer with
the desired styles and applying Edit → Set Default Properties.


Solid Colors and Color Models
Solid fills are defined by one of five color models:

•	 RGB — Red, Green, and Blue values (0–255) are used by a
   computer to display colors. It’s not very human-friendly,
   but all other color models are based on it.
•	 Hex — hexadecimal representation of the RGB value, com-
   monly used in web design and software development. It’s
   quite universal and easy to copy and paste as a single value,
   but also hard to adjust manually.
•	 CSS — decimal representation of the RGB value with an Al-
   pha channel for the opacity (from fully transparent at 0 to
   completely opaque at 1) in one of the CSS formats. Easy to
   copy and paste while working on a web project.
•	 HSL — Hue, Saturation, and Lightness (or Luminance) is
   an alternative representation of the RGB color model based
   on the way human vision perceives colors. Hue reflects a
   pure color on a color wheel (from 0º to 360º), Saturation
   shows the richness of color (from the palest grey at 0 to the
   richest at 100), and Lightness goes from the darkest black at
   0 to the brightest white at 100.
Basic Elements                                                                                           41


•	 HSB — Hue, Saturation, and Brightness (also known as
   HSV) is similar to HSL, with the difference in how Satura-
   tion and Brightness are calculated. 100% Brightness in HSB
   will produce the white color only when the Saturation is 0,
   while in HSL, 100% Lightness will always produce the white
   color regardless of the Saturation.

HSL and HSB are the best models for design work and granu-
lar control — they are indispensable for adjusting brightness
and saturation of a base color 5. Hex, CSS, or RGB models are       5  See also on HSL and HSB:

great for referencing colors during implementation. Switch          RGB vs HSB vs HSL — Demystified
between them based on the kind of work you’re doing at the          https://medium.com/innovaccer-
                                                                    tech/rgb-vs-hsb-vs-hsl-demystified-
moment. Keep in mind that these color models are used only          1992d7273d3a
for representing colors while working in Figma. During ex-          HSL and HSV
port, all values will be converted to the sRGB color profile.       https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HSL_
                                                                    and_HSV
You can use one- or three-character shortcuts when entering
color values in Hex format. A single character will be replicat-
ed to all six characters and handy for quickly entering shades
of grey, like 3 for 333333, or A for AAAAAA. Three character
shortcuts work just as in CSS, where 63C becomes 6633CC.

The eyedropper tool inside the Color Picker lets you sam-
ple a solid color from any object or image in a file. It can be
invoked by the keyboard shortcut i when you have the Color
Picker open. When closed, the same shortcut (or its alterna-
tive Ctrl-C) will replace the topmost fill with the selected col-
or.

It’s important to keep accessibility in mind when selecting
colors for your project. Web Content Accessibility Guide-
lines (WCAG) recommend specific contrast ratios for small
and large text, as well as images. Plugin Contrast makes it
extremely easy to scan your project for contrast issues or
check individual combinations. There are multiple choices for
accessibility plugins, but this one is free and, in my opinion,
works the best.
Basic Elements                                                      42


Gradients
In addition to the solid colors, Figma also provides four types
of gradients — Linear, Radial, Angular, and Diamond. All of
them progressively blend colors and/or transparency from the
start to end point using one of these techniques:

•	 Linear gradient transitions in a straight line.
•	 Radial gradient spreads out from the center.
•	 Angular gradient sweeps clockwise from the starting point.
•	 Diamond gradient creates a diamond shape.




Gradients are defined by a color combination, just as much as
by their type. There are a few common schemes worth con-
sidering:

•	 Adding a soft monochromatic gradient to solid colors may
   not be in line with a flat design trend, but it makes every-
   thing look more natural and brings depth and dimension to
   the design. In real life, colors are never completely flat and
   always have highlights and shadows from the surrounding
   light sources. It’s a good idea to figure out where your light
   is coming from and keep the source consistent across all
   elements.
•	 Analogous colors are next to each other on the color wheel
   and can produce beautiful and natural-looking gradients.
   To create them, keep the Hue difference within 60–120º.
Basic Elements                                                     43


•	 Gradients between a pair of complimentary colors (direct
   opposites on a color wheel with a difference in Hue of 180º)
   often look muddy because color travels across the spec-
   trum through the point of no saturation. Changing Hue
   difference to 160–200º can help, but they can also be im-
   proved by adding an extra point to shift the direction of the
   transition.
Basic Elements                                                                                       44


•	 If you’re looking for a smooth transition without a sharp
   line at the starting point of an angular gradient, try mov-
   ing the start and end points apart or having more than two
   points.




•	 Adobe Color 6 and uiGradients 7 are great resources for         6  https://color.adobe.com
                                                                   7  https://uigradients.com
   exploring color combinations. Another infinite source of
                                                                   8 The Secret of Great Gradient
   color inspiration is nature — look for photos with a color      https://uxplanet.org/the-secret-of-
   scheme you have in mind and pick colors from it with an         great-gradient-2f2c49ef3968
   eyedropper tool. 8
•	 Webgradients plugin includes a collection of beautiful and
   easy-to-use gradients.


Image Fill
I mentioned this type of fill while describing Place Image in
Shape Tools. Any shape can be filled with a raster image in
one of four ways:

•	 Fill covers the whole shape with the image.
•	 Fit shows as much of the image as possible within a given
   shape.
•	 Crop scales the shape without affecting proportions of the
   image. This is a default mode when using the Place Image
   button in the toolbar. You can crop an object with any Im-
   age Fill by double-clicking on it while holding Option or Alt
   key.
•	 Tile repeats the image within the shape and provides a way
   to adjust the size of every tile.
Basic Elements                                                                                          45


You can insert multiple images into shapes at once. Select
Place Image tool in the toolbar or press Shift-Command-K, and
select multiple images from the disk. Your cursor will turn
into a stack of images with a red counter, and now you can
click on objects one by one to apply them as Image fills.

Figma also provides a simple built-in raster editor with basic
controls like rotation, exposure, contrast, saturation, tem-
perature, tint, highlights, and shadows. The following formats
are supported: PNG, JPEG, GIF, TIFF, and WEBP. Due to brows-
er limitations, the width and height of an image must not be
larger than 4096 pixels.

It may be unexpected, but Figma also supports animated GIFs.
The animation is not shown in the editor (although you can
pick a frame to display), but can be viewed in Presentation
View. This is a great way to add realistic spinners, subtle ani-
mations, and video elements to your prototypes. It shows as a       9  Bring Figma prototypes to life
                                                                    with GIFs
GIF in the list to differentiate from regular Image fills and can   https://www.figma.com/blog/bring-
be played in the Image Adjustments panel. 9                         figma-prototypes-to-life-with-gifs/

Used image as a fill, but now want to export it from Figma
in the original resolution? That will require a little hack. Se-
lect an object with an Image fill, go to the Inspect tab in the
Properties panel, then switch it to Table view. Click a blue file
name, and it’ll open the original file in a new browser window.


Multiple Fills
Layers can have more than one fill placed on top of each oth-
er. They can be reordered by dragging an icon that appears on
hover on the left side of the fill. Fills can also be temporarily
hidden by clicking on the eye icon, or removed by clicking on
the minus icon.
Basic Elements                                                                                              46


Blend Modes
Blending modes determine how colors of objects blend with
the colors of underlying objects and can be applied to individ-
ual fills, layers, and groups. They are pretty standard across
design tools and easy to play with, but fully understanding
how they work can help with achieving desired effects 10.                 10 Extra reading on blending modes:

                                                                          PDF Blend Modes
It’s best to discuss blending modes in terms of color termi-              https://www.adobe.com/content/
nology:                                                                   dam/acom/en/devnet/pdf/pdfs/pdf_
                                                                          reference_archives/blend_modes.
•	 The blend color is the original color of the selected layer or fill.   pdf

                                                                          Blending Modes Explained — The
•	 The base color is the underlying color.                                Complete Guide to Photoshop
•	 The resulting color is what’s produced by blending them to-            Blend Modes
                                                                          https://photoshoptrainingchannel.
   gether.                                                                com/blending-modes-explained/

Figma provides the following conveniently grouped modes.                  The Ultimate Visual Guide to
                                                                          Understanding Blend Modes
•	 Normal is the default blend mode that fills the object with            https://www.slrlounge.com/
                                                                          workshop/the-ultimate-visual-guide-
   the blend color without interaction with the base color. If the        to-understanding-blend-modes/
   color has transparency, the process called alpha compositing           About blending modes
   is applied to create a combination of two colors.                      https://helpx.adobe.com/illustrator/
                                                                          using/transparency-blending-
                                                                          modes.html#about_blending_
                                                                          modes
Basic Elements                                                     47


Blend modes for darkening colors:

•	 Darken selects the darkest values in RGB channels of the
   blend and base colors as the resulting color. Base colors
   lighter than the blend color are replaced, and those darker
   than the blend color do not change.
•	 Multiply mode multiplies the RGB channel values from
   the blend color with the base color’s values. The result is
   always a darker color. Multiplying any color with black pro-
   duces black (as multiplying by zero), and with white leaves
   the color unchanged (as multiplying by one). The visual
   effect is similar to drawing with multiple markers on top of
   each other.
•	 Color Burn darkens the base color to reflect the blend
   color. The darker the base color, the more its color is used.
   Blending with white color produces no difference. When
   blend color is homogeneous, this effect is equivalent to
   changing the black point of the base color.




Blend modes for darkening colors.
Table illustration by by Elsma Ramirez, blush.design.
Basic Elements                                                         48


Blend modes for lightening colors:

•	 Lighten selects the lightest values in RGB channels of the
   blend and base colors as the resulting color. Base colors
   darker than the blend color are replaced, and ones lighter
   than the blend color do not change.
•	 Screen mode has the opposite effect to Multiply. It multi-
   plies the inverse RGB channel values of the blend and base
   colors, so the result is always lighter. The effect is similar to
   projecting multiple images to a single screen.
•	 Color Dodge lightens the base color to reflect the blend
   color. The lighter the base color, the more its color is used.
   Blending with black color produces no change. When blend
   color is homogeneous, this effect is equivalent to changing
   the white point of the base color.




Blend modes for lightening colors.
Basic Elements                                                      49


The combination of above blend modes for changing contrast:

•	 Overlay is a combination of Multiply and Screen modes,
   depending on the base color value. Blend colors overlay the
   base color, while preserving its highlights and shadows. The
   base color is not replaced, but mixed with the blend color
   to reflect the lightness or darkness of the base.
•	 Soft Light darkens or lightens the colors, depending on the
   blend color value. The effect is similar to shining a diffused
   spotlight on the base.
•	 Hard Light is a combination of Multiply and Screen modes,
   but unlike Overlay, it depends on the blend color value. The
   effect is similar to shining a harsh spotlight on the base.




The combination of darkening and lightening modes.
Basic Elements                                                      50


Arithmetic blend modes can produce interesting effects:

•	 Difference subtracts the darker of the two colors from
   the lighter. Blending with black produces no change, while
   blending with white inverts the base color. Can be used to
   verify the alignment of objects with similar content.
•	 Exclusion is a lower contrast variation of Difference mode.




Arithmetic modes.


Blend modes based on an HSL color model:

•	 Hue applies hue of the blend color to the base color.
•	 Saturation applies saturation of the blend color to the base
   color.
•	 Color applies both hue and saturation of the blend color to
   the base color. Useful for tinting images to a specific color.
•	 Luminosity applies luminosity of the blend color to the
   base color.




HSL-based modes.
Basic Elements                                                      51


In raster image editors like Photoshop, blend modes can be
used to manipulate the exposure of specific areas with Dodg-
ing and Burning, increase sharpness with Luminosity, or con-
trast with Overlay. But what can they be used for in Figma
and other vector editors?

Besides the obvious application in illustrations, blend modes
can be used in UI design for quickly tweaking color scheme
with HSL modes, applying specific tint with Color, or adjusting
overall exposure and contrast. Consider using them for quick
experiments, especially in combination with Masks to limit
the area of application.

While working on a dark mode of the People-First Jobs web-
site, an unexpected use case for blend modes came up. The
original logo was designed to be used on a light background,
and colors of overlapping sections were blended in Multiply
mode.

The effect is similar to drawing the logo with three markers
when overlapping sections become darker. That didn’t look
right on a dark background.

Knowing that Screen blend mode is the opposite of Multiply,
I set colors of overlapping sections with it for the dark mode.
That produced a version that looked much better on a dark
background, but still was consistent with the original logo.


Layer Opacity vs. Color Opacity
You might have noticed that both colors and layers have a
way to set a blend mode and opacity. They should be set for
the whole layer when you want an object to have a consistent
blending and level of transparency. Color opacity can be ap-
plied more selectively. Besides, opacity is saved along with the
color in Styles, so if you want to change the opacity of an ob-
ject filled with a Color Style, changing a layer’s opacity may be
the only way.
Basic Elements                                                      52


You can choose to use number keys for setting a layer opaci-
ty in Preferences → Use Number Keys for Opacity under the
hamburger menu. That will overwrite a standard behavior of
using number keys for zooming — 1 to zoom to fit, 2 to zoom
to selection, and 0 to zoom at 100%.


STROKE

Strokes are defined by their fills, width, alignment, and a few
advanced properties. We already covered fills in a previous
section, width is quite self-explanatory, and alignment defines
if the stroke will be drawn inside, outside, or at the center of
the path. Advanced settings are a little more interesting.




I mentioned Cap before when discussing the Arrow Tool. Cap
provides a way to make an endpoint on an open path round-
ed, square, or to decorate it with one of two arrow styles. A
unique Cap style can be picked for any endpoint on a path.

Join styles define what connections between parts of a path
look like — Miter, Bevel, or Round. Surprisingly, terminology
for both Miter and Bevel comes from woodworking. Small
Miter Angle results in a sharp joint, and as it increases, it be-
comes the same as Bevel.

Dashed strokes can be based on as few as two comma-sepa-
rated values — widths of dash and gap — and as many as 8 for
more complicated designs.
Basic Elements                                                                                        53


EFFECTS

Objects can have four kinds of effects applied to them — Inner
Shadow, Drop Shadow, Layer Blur, and Background Blur. (In
case you’re designing for the web, all of them have matching
CSS properties.) While blurs can be applied only once, up to
eight shadows of every kind can be stacked together for tight
control over the result. Effects take their toll on Figma perfor-
mance, so if you experience slowness, try to use blurs sparing-
ly and reduce the number of stacked shadows.

In the real world, shadows depend on the position and inten-
sity of light sources. In user interfaces, light is usually coming
from the front (iOS), front-top (macOS), or top-left corner
(Classic Mac OS and Windows 95). It’s best to keep light
sources and resulting shadows consistent with screens you’re
working on and environment you’re designing for (OS, brows-
er chrome, etc.) Shadow’s position can be controlled with X
and Y offset, and intensity with Blur, Spread, and Opacity.

Shadows create a sense of depth, which is vital for building a
visual hierarchy. In designs with multiple hierarchical levels,
keep track of where your objects belong — those closer to the
viewer get more attention than objects further away. Materi-         11  Light and shadows
                                                                     https://material.io/design/
al Design 11 provides a great example of documenting and ex-
                                                                     environment/light-shadows.html
plaining its light sources, shadows, and elevation.




Elevation levels.
Basic Elements                                                                                         54


Object elevation is especially important in UI controls like
buttons, fields, and menus, as their behavior traditionally de-
pends on a sense of depth. Buttons change their depth when
pressed, sunken fields invite users to fill them in, and menus
pop up on top of everything else.

Shadow Spread 12 is important for imitating elevation and rep-      12  Behind the feature: shedding
                                                                    light on shadow spread
resents the distance by which to expand or contract a shadow
                                                                    https://www.figma.com/blog/behind-
in all directions. The implementation of this property in Fig-      the-feature-shadow-spread/
ma is based on CSS property box-shadow, and shares some of
its limitations. Currently, Spread can be added only to rectan-
gles, ellipses, and backgrounds of frames and components.

It feels like a hack, but it may be useful to imitate a border on
only one side of the object by using a Shadow with Blur set
to 0. This effect can be applied to multiple sides by stacking
multiple shadows with different offsets together.




Alternatively, by stacking multiple shadows on top of each
other, you can imitate multiple light sources or create incredi-
bly smooth and realistic shadows.
Basic Elements                                                                                         55


The great plugin SmoothShadow provides a lot of control
over the result.




Regular shadow vs. SmoothShadow plugin.


Layer Blur makes the layer’s geometry look out of focus.
Background Blur applies the same effect to all the layers un-
der the current layer, but only when it has some transparency.
Interface designers can direct the user’s attention by blurring
some parts of the interface, as humans pay attention to what’s
in focus and ignore the rest. Apple popularized this effect by        13 Translucency and Vibrancy
                                                                      https://developer.apple.com/design/
introducing translucency 13 in iOS 8.
                                                                      human-interface-guidelines/macos/
                                                                      visual-design/translucency/

COPY AND PASTE PROPERTIES

You can copy and paste colors and effects between objects by
selecting them in a list and pressing Command-C (Ctrl-C on
Windows) to copy, then pasting to another object with Com-
mand-V.

All properties of the object (opacity, fills, strokes, and effects)
can be copied from the context menu Copy/Paste → Copy
Properties (Option-Command-C or Alt-Ctrl-C) and pasted with
Copy/Paste → Paste Properties (Option-Command-V).


SELECTION COLORS

The Selection Colors feature is unique to Figma and lets you
view and change colors in multiple objects at once. This is a
huge time saver when you are adjusting colors in a group of
Basic Elements                                                                                             56


layers or the whole mockup, as it includes colors in both fills
and strokes (but not in the effects 14). To use it, select multiple    14  https://twitter.com/mwichary/
                                                                       status/1250129890306711552
layers or a parent object, then review and change colors in the
Selection Colors section of Properties panel.

By clicking on the target button next to the color, you can
select only objects using it, and then selectively adjust them.
The Style button with four dots lets you standardize colors
within a system, which we’ll talk about later.

For situations where you need to be more specific and select
all objects sharing the same fill, stroke, or effect, there is a set
of features like “Select All with Same Fill/Stroke/Effect/etc.”
in the Edit menu.
Basic Elements                                                        57



Text
Text is essential for design work, and Figma provides solid
tools for working with it. Built-in access to a giant collection
of Google Fonts, great alignment controls, advanced Open-
Type features, selection of useful plugins, and Auto Layout
make it possible to create and maintain even very complicated
layouts with ease. While occasionally missing things like bul-
leted lists and placing text on a path, I can see how they may
be considered non-critical for an interface design tool. I am
sure the Figma team will get to them eventually!

Figma works in a browser, and different browsers and operat-
ing systems render text differently. It wouldn’t be acceptable
if the same design looked different based on an environment,
so Figma uses a custom text rendering engine. This guaran-
tees a consistent look across all platforms.

To start editing an existing text layer, double-click it, or select
and press the Enter or Return key. Once you’re in text editing
mode, you can edit other text layers by clicking on them once.


CREATING AND RESIZING TEXT BLOCKS

To create a new text layer, select the Text tool from the tool-
bar, or press the T key on the keyboard. Your next action will
determine what kind of a text block you’re creating:

•	 Clicking once creates a text block with resizing set to Auto
   Width. The line of text will be as long as you let it. The new
   line will be created only if you press the Enter or Return key.
   This is known as point text and ideal for menu labels, navi-
   gation items, button labels, etc.
•	 Clicking and dragging creates a Fixed Size text block. Your
   text will automatically wrap inside, but it may overflow the
   dimensions of a bounding box if it’s too long. Normally it’s
   referred to as area text and used when the area can’t be
   changed, like in illustrations or overlays.
Basic Elements                                                                                          58


Don’t worry if you changed your mind or picked a wrong
type — it can be changed later in the Resizing section of the
Text panel. There is one more kind of resizing — Auto Height
keeps the width of the block fixed while text wraps and chang-
es height automatically. This works great for paragraphs with
longer copy.

Keep in mind that when you manually resize text blocks
set to Auto Width or Auto Height, their resizing type will
be changed as well. Manually setting the width of the Auto
Width block will change it to Auto Height, while resizing its
height will change it to Fixed Size. Manually setting the height
of the Auto Height block will make it Fixed Size.

Text in Fixed Size blocks can be vertically aligned to the top,
middle, or bottom. This preference doesn’t affect Auto Width
or Auto Height blocks.


PICKING TYPEFACES

Let’s start by clarifying terminology. Typeface is a collection of
characters in a single design, often including different styles
(i.e., italic or oblique) and weights (i.e., bold or black). It also
can be referred to as a font family. On the other hand, font is a
file with a set of characters all of one style.

Figma comes with fonts from multiple sources, and they’re
unusual because of its browser-based nature:

•	 Local fonts stored on your computer. If you’re using Figma
   in the browser, it won’t be able to access your local fonts
   without Figma Font Helper 15 app. The desktop app has this          15  Use Local Fonts with Figma
                                                                       Font Helper
   functionality built-in, so you don’t need a separate app.
                                                                       https://help.figma.com/hc/en-us/
•	 Web fonts like Google Fonts and Font Awesome. Having                articles/360039956894-Use-Local-
                                                                       Fonts-with-Figma-Font-Helper
   them inside a design app is handy if you’re designing for
   the web. Keep in mind that Figma doesn’t really integrate           16  https://twitter.com/rsms/
                                                                       status/1235952641001156608
   with these services, but periodically copies their font files,
   so font versions can be different 16.
Basic Elements                                                                                          59


•	 Shared fonts. This option is available only for users on the      17 Upload Fonts to an
                                                                     Organization
   Figma Organization Plan 17, but it’s worth mentioning. Or-
                                                                     https://help.figma.com/hc/en-us/
   ganization admins can upload and share fonts within the           articles/360039956774-Upload-
   organization or the team, and they will become available to       Fonts-to-an-Organization

   individual users.

If you have an Adobe Creative Suite subscription, you can
use Adobe Fonts too, but after activating, they won’t become
available until you reload the file. To do that, right-click on an
open file tab and select “Reload Tab”.

Without previews, a font picker can be hard to use. Figma            18 New ways to create,
                                                                     collaborate, and share more openly
announced its redesign on Config 2020 18, but it still wasn’t
                                                                     https://www.figma.com/blog/config-
released. In the meantime, try a Better Font Picker plugin that      2020-new-feature-announcements/
tries to solve the same problem. It’s limited to showing only
fonts installed in your system, but that’s better than nothing.

If a design file uses a font that’s not available on your comput-
er, you will receive a yellow missing font alert next to the font
in the Text section and in the toolbar’s top-right corner. Keep
in mind that this can happen even if you have the font, but its
version is different. You can ignore this as long as you don’t
need to edit affected text layers. To fix the problem, install the
fonts on your computer or use a built-in Missing Fonts dialog
to replace them.


FONT SIZE, LINE HEIGHT, AND LETTER SPACING

The number of available Font Styles depends on the typeface.
Font Weight of a text block or selection can be changed with
shortcuts Option-Command-< and Option-Command-> (Ctrl-
Alt-< and Ctrl-Alt->).

Font Size is set in pixels on the right of the Font Style selec-
tor.

Line Height (also known as line spacing) controls the dis-
tance between lines of text in a paragraph. Use shortcuts Op-
tion-Shift-< and Option-Shift-> (Alt-Shift-< and Alt-Shift->) to
change it for a text block or selection. By default, it’s set to
Basic Elements                                                                                        60


Auto and matches line height specified by typeface designer,
but it can be changed using either percentage (%) of the font
size or pixels (px). For example, given a font size of 18 pixels,
line height set to Auto will differ from font to font, but set
to 100% will always stay 18 pixels. The way Figma adds space
around lines and generally treats text is closer to CSS specifi-
cation than traditional design apps. For a deep dive and his-
torical context on this topic, check out the article “Getting to    19  https://www.figma.com/blog/
                                                                    line-height-changes/
the bottom of line height in Figma” 19 by Marcin Wichary.

Line height dramatically affects the readability and visual
weight of a text block. The general rule of thumb is that wider
lines of text need more spacing between them, so the eyes can
move from line to line naturally, while shorter lines of text
can be set more tightly.




Letter Spacing defines the spacing between characters and
can be adjusted with keyboard shortcuts Option-< and Op-
tion-> (Alt-< and Alt->). It can be set for the entire text block
or tweak the spacing only for an individual letter. Because of
Basic Elements                                                                                         61


the later, Letter Spacing can be used to set kerning between
individual letters. Having a single control for both settings
may not be convenient, but it’s good to have a manual kerning
option when working on logotypes and more graphical repre-
sentations of text.




Spacing between lowercase letters rarely needs to be changed.
When text is set in all capital letters, the spacing becomes too    20  Butterick’s Practical
                                                                    Typography: Letterspacing
tight as capital letters are designed to appear at the beginning
                                                                    https://practicaltypography.com/
of the word next to lowercase letters 20. Try adding 5–12%          letterspacing.html
extra letter spacing to text in all caps, particularly at smaller
sizes.


SCALING TEXT

The previous section covered scaling text in a traditional
way, but sometimes you may need to scale multiple text lay-
ers at once or have more granular visual feedback during the
process. That’s when Scale Tool (k) from the toolbar comes
in handy — you can select multiple layers and proportionally
scale them to the right size. Keep in mind that scaling results
in fractional font sizes, which you may want to round up later.


PARAGRAPHS

Paragraph Spacing sets the distance between paragraphs in
pixels, usually in a range from a half to one font size. It’s a
Basic Elements                                                                                     62


much nicer alternative to an extra line break, which is too big
and often wrongly used for this purpose.

In the “Type Details” popup, hiding under … icon, Paragraph
Indent provides a way to signal the start of a new paragraph
by indenting its first line. Normally it’s set to 1–4 times the
font size, depending on how wide the text block is.

Matthew Butterick, in his book “Butterick’s Practical Typog-       21  https://practicaltypography.com

raphy” 21, nicely explains the relationship between paragraph
spacing and indent:

    First-line indents and space between paragraphs
    have the same relationship as belts and suspend-
    ers. You only need one to get the job done. Using
    both is a mistake. If you use a first-line indent on a
    paragraph, don’t use space between. And vice ver-
    sa.

Text Alignment options are shown both in standard Text
panel and Type Details popup, but the Justified option is
available only in the normally hidden popup — and for a good
reason! Figma doesn’t support text hyphenation, and with-
out it, the justified text creates large gaps between words and
should be avoided.


TEXT DECORATIONS

Text Decorations like Underline and Strikethrough are not
part of the typeface design and generally available in any font.
Selected text can be underlined by pressing a standard key-
board shortcut Command-U ( just like Command-B universally
works for bold font, and Command-I for italic).


OPENTYPE FEATURES

Some fonts hide beautiful secrets inside them, like small caps,
ligatures, different styles of numbers, or even alternative
versions of some glyphs. Figma does a great job of making
Basic Elements                                                                                         63


these OpenType features more accessible. A list of options
displayed in the Type Details popup depends on a font’s in-
cluded features, and some of them may be grayed out — these
are available, but not applicable to selected text. The best way
to explore all available options is by practice, so play with
Figma’s OpenType playground 22, or pick a font with a good                22  https://www.figma.com/file/
                                                                          I7aquUJskPWwudWatNjfkC/Figma-
number of included features — like the default Roboto, Mont-              OpenType-playground
serrat, Inter, or Vollkorn — and just experiment.

Here are some of the things that you may change:

Letter Case settings are different and rely on what sets of
glyphs were included in a font file. While standard Uppercase,
Lowercase, and Title Case options are available in almost
every font, a Small Caps and Forced Small Caps options show
up only for fonts that include them. Capital Spacing option
increases letter spacing in text set in all caps or small caps,
just as we discussed in the Letter Spacing section. Case-Sen-
sitive Forms realign punctuation and symbols to better
match text set in uppercase.

Figma’s Title Case capitalizes every word in a text block,
which is a universal but very simplistic model. I built a plugin
Proper Title Case that follows capitalization rules from APA,
The Chicago Manual of Style, and modern conventions —
check it out if you’re working with text.

Numbers can be proportional (each number takes as much
space as needed) or monospace (all numbers have the same
width, great for aligning in code or tables), uppercase (the
most common) and lowercase (blends in with text), or a com-
bination of them. They can be positioned on the same level
as text, below it (subscript), or above it (superscript). Some
fonts may even include beautiful fraction support or slashed
zeros.

Ligatures are almost invisible to an untrained eye and pro-
vide nicer glyphs for tricky letter pairs, like “ff”, “fi”, “fl”, “tt”,
etc. Rare Ligatures are usually more decorative and less com-
mon.
Basic Elements                                                                                      64


Contextual Alternatives may turn combinations of charac-
ters into specific glyphs and symbols based on their surround-
ings, like arrows in programming fonts or more appropriate
ending glyphs in scripts.

Ordinals replaces default alphabetic glyphs with the corre-
sponding ordinal forms for use after numbers. This also en-
ables a numero character №, which is technically a ligature.

Stylistic Alternatives and Stylistic Sets were designed to
lend more visual interest to type compositions by bringing
alternative glyphs and ligatures.

This list is far from being complete and includes only the
most common features. If you’re interested in learning more
about OpenType features in Figma, consider reading “An ode        23  https://www.figma.com/blog/
                                                                  opentype-font-features/
to OpenType: Fall in love with the secret world of fonts” 23 by
Marcin Wichary, or reviewing all registered OpenType fea-         24  https://docs.microsoft.com/
                                                                  en-us/typography/opentype/spec/
tures at Microsoft Typography 24.                                 featurelist



USING ICON FONTS

Font Awesome 25 is a very popular and large collection of vec-    25  https://fontawesome.com

tor icons and social logos, and it’s included in Figma’s fonts.
Use their cheatsheet 26 to pick an icon or brand, copy it to      26  https://fontawesome.com/
                                                                  cheatsheet
the clipboard, and paste in Figma. Make sure that font is set
to “Font Awesome 5 Free” or “Font Awesome 5 Brands”, and
pick one of two font styles — Regular or Solid.


CONVERT TEXT TO VECTOR PATHS

In some cases, you may want to convert editable text into vec-
tor paths — if it will be tweaked in a logotype or exported for
places where the current font file will not be available. That
can be done by picking either Flatten (Command-E) or Out-
line Stroke (Shift-Command-E) from the context menu. They
act differently only when applied to more than one layer at
the same time — Outline Stroke will preserve individual lay-
ers, while Flatten will combine them into one.
Basic Elements                                                      65


Keep in mind that this command is not reversible, so it’s a
good idea to duplicate (Command-D) and hide (Shift-Com-
mand-H) editable text layers just in case.


PLUGINS

There are a few plugins that improve different aspects of
working with text.

•	 Typographer — my plugin for formatting text with typo-
   graphic features traditionally used in fine printing, like en-
   and em-dashes, curly quotes, etc.
•	 Spellchecker and Spelll use different services to find and
   correct spelling errors. The former is free, while the latter
   requires a subscription.
•	 At the beginning of this chapter, I mentioned that some-
   times I miss an ability to place text on a path. Well, plugins
   to the rescue! To Path puts any object or text on a path, and
   Arc curves text upward, downward, or into a circle.

By the way, you can assign keyboard shortcuts to the plugins
that you use often. There is no built-in way to achieve this,
but if you use a desktop app on Mac, you can do this on the
system level:

1.	 Go to System Preferences → Keyboard → Shortcuts.
2.	Select App Shortcuts in the left panel.
3.	 Click a plus button and pick Figma in Application dropdown.
4.	Enter plugin name in Menu Title exactly as it appears in
   Plugins menu
5.	 Pick a shortcut and click Add.

When finished, you should see a shortcut next to the plugin
name in the Plugins menu. If it doesn’t work, most likely
there is a conflict with another shortcut in Figma, some other
app, or operating system — try picking a new one. As this is
a system-wide solution, it can be applied to any other menu
item and not just plugins.
Basic Elements                                                                                        66



Exports
Let’s start by talking about pixels and units of measurement.       27  Extra reading:

In Figma, one “pixel” actually refers to one “display point”.       Absolute Lengths (CSS3 Spec)
You may be familiar with this concept from reference pixels in      https://www.w3.org/TR/css3-
                                                                    values/#reference-pixel
CSS, device-independent pixels on Android, and points on iOS 27.
                                                                    Device-independent pixel
A standard-resolution display has a 1:1 pixel density (or @1x),     https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Device-
                                                                    independent_pixel
where one pixel is equal to one point. First retina screens by
                                                                    Image Size and Resolution (Apple)
Apple (like iPhone 4 and MacBook Pro Retina) had a pixel
                                                                    https://developer.apple.com/design/
density of 2:1 (or @2x). iPhone 11 Pro has a pixel density of       human-interface-guidelines/ios/
3:1 (or @3x), where its 1,125 × 2,436 device pixels get scaled to   icons-and-images/image-size-and-
                                                                    resolution/
375 × 812 points. Thanks to this concept, the same websites
and apps can be used on different devices without becoming
three times smaller on a high-resolution 3:1 screen. Because
Figma uses display points internally, even while referring to
them as “pixels” for simplicity, it can export assets with dif-
ferent scaling for standard-resolution and high-resolution
screens.

Officially, Figma doesn’t support print units, but it can ex-
port assets not only for screens. Need to print a 3″ × 3″ im-
age at 300 dpi? 3″ × 300 dots per inch is 900, so scale your
image to 900 × 900 pixels. At 600 dpi, it should be scaled to
1,800 × 1,800 pixels. Of course, lack of CMYK support is a com-
pletely different issue.

Exports in multiple formats and sizes can be set up for any
object in the Export section of the Properties panel. Add
exports by clicking on the plus icon in the top right corner.
Clicking on the minus icon removes the topmost export,
which may not be the one you want to delete. Instead, I prefer
to select an individual export by clicking on its left side and
pressing the Delete key.

Figma supports exporting in PNG, JPG, SVG, and PDF formats.
While the first three are popular choices for development, PDF      28  Our path to creating a precise
                                                                    PDF Exporter
can also be used for exporting shareable and printable docu-
                                                                    https://www.figma.com/blog/
ments 28. The name of the exported file is based on the object      our-path-to-creating-the-highest-
                                                                    quality-pdf-exporter/
Basic Elements                                                      67


name and an optional suffix. If you’ve used a slash (“/”) in the
object name, Figma will interpret it as a group and place ex-
ported files in a folder according to the hierarchy.

The Size of exported raster images (PNG and JPG) can be
changed by selecting one of the default values or entering a
custom one. Use the letter x to define a multiplier, w to set the
width, or h to set the height of an exported image. Clicking on
the “Export Settings” icon with three dots reveals an option
to export “Contents Only”, which will include only select-
ed layer or children of a group or frame. SVG may have a few
more export settings discussed below.

Sometimes you may be exporting a file just to pass it to an-
other design app or a text editor. In that case, you may avoid
the export step and just copy PNG or SVG to the clipboard in
the context menu Copy/Paste → Copy as PNG/SVG.


SVG

Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) is an open XML format. Unlike
other image formats, SVGs can be edited as text, scripted, an-
imated, scaled, and it’s widely supported in browsers. When
exporting as SVG, an object is not just rendered into an image,
but translated into a markup language. This approach has its
limitations as not all Figma features are supported by SVG and
not all SVG features are supported by browsers.

Figma features that are not supported in SVG:

•	 Angular and Diamond gradients will be exported as Radial.
•	 Background Blurs won’t be exported.
•	 Some strokes will be converted to fills.

There are also some extra settings available for SVG exports:

•	 Include “id” Attribute — adds an id attribute based on
   object names to SVG elements. You need this only when
   referencing SVG elements from code, so keep it disabled to
   reduce file size.
Basic Elements                                                      68


•	 Outline Text — by default, all text layers will be converted
   to vector shapes. Disable it to keep the text editable in oth-
   er apps, but remember that the font you selected may not
   be available, and overall rendering may be different on oth-
   er computers.
•	 Simplify Stroke — available only when you’re exporting a
   Vector Network with an Inside or Outside stroke. SVG as a
   format only supports Center stroke, so by default, all oth-
   er stroke types will be converted to it. This may result in
   an unexpected look, so by choosing not to simplify stroke,
   Figma will attempt to reproduce the desired outcome with
   masks and extra code.


SLICE TOOL (S)

The Slice Tool lets you specify a region of the screen for ex-
porting. Its boundaries are independent of the content and
may contain multiple objects or only part of an object. When
working with the file, Slices stay completely out of the way
and can be selected only in the Layers panel.

You can export all Slices and objects with defined exports at
once by selecting File → Export in the menu. There, you can
see previews, names, formats, and dimensions, and enable or
disable individual exports. This is a great way to update all
assets defined in your file with a single click.
Creating Layouts
Creating Layouts                                                                                      70


Individual elements, shapes, and text layers can get you far
into the design process, but without organizing them into log-
ical and editable units, it will be hard to keep going. I like the
way Brad Frost thinks about design organization in his Atomic        1  https://bradfrost.com/blog/post/
                                                                     atomic-web-design/
Design 1 methodology:

    Lately I’ve been more interested in what our in-
    terfaces are comprised of and how we can con-
    struct design systems in a more methodical way.
    In searching for inspiration and parallels, I kept
    coming back to chemistry. The thought is that all
    matter (whether solid, liquid, gas, simple, com-
    plex, etc) is comprised of atoms. Those atomic
    units bond together to form molecules, which in
    turn combine into more complex organisms to ul-
    timately create all matter in our universe. Similar-
    ly, interfaces are made up of smaller components.
    This means we can break entire interfaces down
    into fundamental building blocks and work up
    from there.

According to this approach, individual layers are atoms. We
combine them into groups or frames, which are molecules of
the design — an icon consisting of multiple shapes or a but-
ton made of a rectangle and a text layer. These smallest units
form organisms, such as a website header or a search form.
Finally, we put together organisms into layouts of individual
screens, that can be organized into pages.

Figma provides tools for organizing elements on every level
of this approach. Thanks to powerful features like Constraints
and Auto Layout, we can reuse the same modules in multiple
sizes and with different content. Understanding how these
tools work will form a foundation for creating reusable com-
ponents in the next section.
Creating Layouts                                                71



Tidying Up and Smart Selection
Before we get to molecules in the form of groups or frames,
let’s see what we can do with arrangements of individual lay-
ers. Smart Selection makes it easy to reorder or change the
spacing between multiple objects. There are only two require-
ments:

•	 Objects must overlap on an axis.




•	 Spacing between objects must be equal on every axis.
Creating Layouts                                                   72


Objects can be of different shapes and sizes, as long as they
are aligned and spaced properly.




It’s easy to align objects on the same axis by using the align-
ment tools or pressing Control-Command-Arrow Up/Down/
Left/Right shortcut.

Inconsistent spacing between objects can be fixed manually,
but a better use of your time would be to automatically dis-
tribute spacing or tidy up the whole selection.


DISTRIBUTE SPACING

Select a row or column of objects and click the last icon in the
alignment row.

In it, pick an option to distribute spacing along their axis.
Spacing in a column should be distributed vertically and in a
row horizontally. The objects will be spaced evenly between
the first and the last ones, which are never moved.
Creating Layouts                                                  73


TIDY UP

An even smarter Tidy up tool lets you automatically redistrib-
ute objects based on your selection. Select multiple siblings
that you want to set an equal distance apart, hover the cursor
over the selection, and you’ll see one of the variants of the
icon in the bottom right corner.

Alternatively, pick Tidy up from the same dropdown as Dis-
tribute tools or use a shortcut Control-Option-T on Mac or
Ctrl-Alt-T on Windows.

Tidying up horizontally or vertically will just Distribute ob-
jects, automatically picking a mode based on your selection.
Acting on a grid-like two-dimensional selection is more tricky.
Figma will do its best to set a consistent horizontal spacing
between columns and vertical spacing between rows, but un-
like Distribute tools, it may reposition objects on edges of
your selection to form a grid.
Creating Layouts                                                  74


SMART SELECTION

Evenly spaced objects form a foundation for a Smart Selec-
tion. When a selection passes the requirements, Figma will
show Smart Handles as pink rings at the center of each object.
By clicking on them, you can easily rearrange objects in the
selection.




You can resize one or multiple objects in the selection while
keeping spacing between them consistent. Select all objects
and click a pink ring Smart Handle on the object you want to
resize, with Shift if there are a few of them. When an object
has a pink bounding box, you can resize it vertically or hori-
zontally while all other objects will be repositioned automati-
cally. You can delete (Delete or Backspace) or duplicate (Com-
mand-D) selected objects as well.

When you hover over the Smart Selection, additional han-
dles will show up as pink lines between rows and columns.
By dragging them, you can change the distance between rows
and columns. (Hold down Shift to adjust in the increments of
10 or your Big Nudge value.) You can also set horizontal and
vertical spacing in the Properties panel.
Creating Layouts                                                   75


Space distribution, Tidying up, and Smart Selection are really
powerful tools. You can start with a large selection of disorga-
nized objects and set consistent spacing and arrangement in
only a few clicks. Even if you’re used to doing all of this man-
ually in other design apps, the saved time is worth forming
new habits.
Creating Layouts                                                    76



Groups and Frames
Both groups and frames let you combine layers so they can be
handled as a single object. That’s where their similarities end.

Layer groups and folders were part of the design tools for a
long time. Their only function is to combine related layers
for moving around or organizing purposes. I like to think of
groups in Figma as shortcuts to selecting multiple layers with
one click. They don’t have any properties of their own, their
size reflects the children’s dimensions, and if you apply fill or
stroke to the group, it will be passed to all the nested layers
individually.

As the focus of design tools evolved from illustrations to in-
terfaces, the requirements changed as well. Unlike in static
illustrations, parts of the interface must be flexible and adapt-
able to different screen sizes, number of items, and length of
copy. To address this, Figma came up with another abstrac-
tion in the form of frames, which behave as adaptive parent
containers with their own sizes, properties, and features.

Frames and groups can be converted to each other at any mo-
ment, using a dropdown in the Properties panel.


GROUPS

To create a group, select at least one layer and either choose
“Group Selection” in the context menu or press Command-G
(Ctrl-G on Windows). To ungroup, select the group and
choose “Ungroup” or press Shift-Command-G (Shift-Ctrl-G on
Windows). Layers, groups, and frames can be added or re-
moved from the group by dragging them in or out within the
Layers panel.

A single click on a group selects the group, and a double-click
selects a nested object. If you have a group nested inside a
group, it will be selected by a double-click, so you need to
double-click again to go one level deeper and select a nested
Creating Layouts                                                  77


layer. In complex layouts, this can be tiresome, so instead,
you can select an individual layer inside any group by holding
down a Command key. Another trick is to right-click on an ob-
ject while holding down a Command key to see all of its par-
ents and children. Of course, you can also select an individual
layer in the Layers panel.

Use groups when size isn’t constrained, and all objects must
resize as a whole. Icons and illustrations are good examples.


FRAMES

Frames are adaptive containers with dimensions defined by
the user. As real containers, they have their own properties
like corner radius, fill, stroke, and even effects.

Frames can be nested inside other frames, and their level of
depth affects their behavior. Top-level frames placed on the
canvas are used for defining areas for the individual screens
or pages, so they are similar to Artboards in other design
tools. Their names show up on the canvas, and they can be
used in prototypes or presentations.




Frames can be created either empty or from selected layers.
To create an empty frame, choose the Frame Tool (F) in the
toolbar and either drag out an area of the screen or pick one
of the predefined popular sizes in the Properties panel on the
right. To create a frame from existing layers, select at least
one of them and either choose “Frame Selection” in the con-
text menu or press Option-Command-G (Alt-Ctrl-G on Win-
dows). “Ungrouping” a frame works the same as for groups.

The frame size can be changed by dragging its bounding box
or editing width and height values in the Properties panel.
It also can be resized to match the size of nested objects by
clicking “Resize to Fit” icon (Option-Shift-Command-R) in
Creating Layouts                                                    78


the top right corner of the Properties panel. When the frame
is resized, nested objects move or scale based on the Con-
straints set by the user — we will talk about them in the next
chapter.

Frames can be selected in the Layers panel, or if they are
top-level, by clicking on their name on the canvas. Nested ob-
jects get selected by a single click, so save your double-clicks
for groups and editing mode.

For maximum efficiency, frames, groups, and layers can be
navigated using keyboard shortcuts. With a frame or group se-
lected, press Enter to select all nested objects. Press Shift-En-
ter to select the current object’s parent frame or group. Use
Tab or Shift-Tab to navigate to the next or previous object ac-
cordingly. Esc always clears the selection.

Unlike with groups, objects can be dragged into and out of the
frame. This is only possible because the frame’s size is strict-
ly defined. While dragging an object, you can hold Command
(Ctrl on Windows) to force an object to nest inside a frame.
To prevent an object from being nested in or moved out of a
frame, hold the Space bar while dragging. This is not an obvi-
ous feature, but without the Space bar dragging layers around
can be surprisingly annoying.

Because nested objects can be partially or completely outside
of frame’s dimensions, you can choose to “Clip content” of
the frame in the Properties panel. All the parts “overflowing”
frame’s boundaries will be hidden. Consider it a built-in clip-
ping mask, matching dimensions of the frame.
Creating Layouts                                                 79


Use frames to create layouts where nested objects should
maintain a specific size and location. For example, the navi-
gation on the left and search on the right side of the header,
preserved in their size and space when the header is resized
from portrait to landscape orientation.




The same frame in two sizes.
Creating Layouts                                                    80



Constraints
This is where the fun begins! Until this moment, it might not
have been clear why to bother using frames for anything ex-
cept top-level artboards if groups are so familiar and straight-
forward. But because the size of the frames is predefined,
Figma can be smart about moving and scaling its children.

Constraints define how objects respond when their frame is
resized. They help when the design is adjusted to multiple
screen sizes, or an element is being reused in different parts
of the UI. Constraints can be applied along both the horizon-
tal and vertical axis. By default, they are set to Left and Top,
which can be surprising when you resize a frame for the first
time.




Not at all what you’d expect after resizing groups in the past!
Let’s see available Constraints for a horizontal axis:

•	 Left maintains the position of the object relative to the left
   side of the frame and doesn’t change size.
Creating Layouts                                                  81


•	 Right maintains the position of the object relative to the
   right side of the frame and doesn’t change size.
•	 Left & Right maintains the position of the object relative
   to both sides of the frame, which will cause it to grow or
   shrink horizontally when the frame is resized.
•	 Center maintains the object’s position relative to the cen-
   ter of the frame and doesn’t change size.
•	 Scale maintains the position and size of the object propor-
   tionally to the frame’s dimensions. It’s consistent with how
   groups are being resized.

Options for a vertical axis work the same, so let’s not stop on
them. Here is an example of the same frame resized to the
same size, but with different pairs of Constraints applied to
the children.




Constraints can be applied to objects or frames nested within
other frames. That said, they can’t be applied to groups since
they always inherit properties from their children and don’t
have any properties of their own. When an object within a
Creating Layouts                                                   82


frame is selected, blue dotted lines show which constraints
are currently applied to it.




You may need to ignore constraints and resize the frame
without moving or scaling its children in some cases. This
can be done by holding down Command (or Ctrl on Windows)
while resizing the frame. I often use this feature to change the
height of the screen to fit the content.
Creating Layouts                                               83


Let’s see how Constraints can be used in practice by design-
ing a simple email app screen that can be used both portrait
and landscape orientations.
Creating Layouts                                                84


After creating the screen in portrait mode and setting up
all the Constraints, I just duplicated it (Command-D) and
changed the orientation to landscape — all objects moved and
resized on their own, according to their Constraints.




The only area that can be improved is the toolbar at the bot-
tom. It would be nice if icons were evenly distributed across
the toolbar instead of being stuck in the center. To achieve
this, let’s look at Layout Grids.
Creating Layouts                                                                                         85



Layout Grid
Swiss graphic designers started experimenting with grids
in the middle of the last century. Over time, grids became
a standard way to design structured pages. Considering the
role they play in creating consistent, modular, and reusable
layouts, it’s not surprising that web and UI designers started
using them as soon as technology allowed.

At first, grids on the screen replicated paper layouts with fixed
dimensions. In 2009, Ethan Marcotte published the article
“Fluid Grids” 2 in A List Apart, where he proposed a new way        2  https://alistapart.com/article/
                                                                    fluidgrids/
to create fluid grids that resize with the browser window. That
was an important milestone in web design, but possible only
in code — design tools were lagging behind, still operating in
fixed dimensions. Luckily, today this is not a case anymore.

Figma has three tools for creating layout grids — Grid, Col-
umns, and Rows. After adding a grid, click its icon to change
type and settings. Layout grids can be combined in any way,
even with multiple grids of the same type overlaying one an-
other.

Layout grids can be applied only to Frames. Considering how
frames can be nested inside each other, we can create truly
modular grids on different levels — columns for the whole
screen, rows for a text baseline, a mix of the two for the units,
a uniform grid for an icon, etc.
Creating Layouts                                                                                        86




Grid is the simplest one and overlays the frame with a uni-
form grid of predefined size. It’s often used for designing con-
sistent symbols and icons, but can help with screen layouts as
well.

By default, the uniform grid size is set to 10px, although 8px
                                                                   3  Understanding layout
grids are much more common. Google’s Material Design 3
                                                                   https://material.io/design/layout/
recommends aligning the overall layout to an 8px grid and          understanding-layout.html
Creating Layouts                                                                                           87


smaller elements like icons and type to 4px grid. Check out
the article “The 8-Point Grid” 4 for implementation details.         4  The 8-Point Grid
                                                                     https://spec.fm/specifics/8-pt-grid
If you decide to use an 8px grid, consider also changing the
“Big Nudge” value from 10 to 8. Big nudge defines the incre-
ment of value change with the Shift key held down. It can be
set in Preferences → Nudge Amount under the hamburger
button.

Columns and Rows are more powerful, and can be created
either fixed or stretchy.

Fixed columns and rows have fixed width or height and can
be aligned to either side or center of the frame. Gutter is the
space between the rows and columns, and Offset defines
the distance from the side of the frame where the grid starts
(applies only to Left/Right and Top/Bottom). In fixed grids,
Count set to Auto will fill all available space with predefined
columns and rows. Fixed columns and rows are useful if your
frame has a fixed size or you’re designing for a single screen
size, which is rare now.

Stretchy layout grids have almost the same properties as
fixed, but their width or height is automatically calculated
based on dimensions of the frame, count of columns and
rows, gutter, and margin. In stretchy grids, Margin replaces
Offset and defines the distance between the outermost edges
of the layout grid and the frame. Stretchy columns and rows
provide a great foundation for responsive design on the web
and adaptive layouts in apps.

If columns and rows in alternating colors are too visually
heavy, there is a cool trick letting you create lightweight 1-pix-
el grids by setting Gutter to 0. This is especially nice when
you need to show a baseline grid for setting text or to indicat-
ing padding inside a frame.
Creating Layouts                                                     88




Layout grids are great for aligning elements, but having them
visible at all times will interrupt the design process. Individ-
ual grids can be hidden in the Layout Grid panel, but most
often, I find it useful to toggle all grids visible at the moment.
In the top-right corner of the screen, click a Zoom percentage
and either enable or disable Layout Grids in the dropdown
menu (Control-G on Mac or Ctrl-Shift-4 on Windows).

You can copy and paste grids between elements. To do this,
select one or multiple (with Shift pressed) grids on a frame
and copy them to the clipboard (Command-C on Mac or Ctrl-C
on Windows). Switch to the frame you want to apply a Layout
Grid to and paste them using keyboard shortcut Command-V
on Mac or Ctrl-V on Windows. A Layout Grid can also be
saved to and reused from Styles, but we’ll talk about that in
the next section.
Creating Layouts                                                  89


LAYOUT GRID AND CONSTRAINTS

Using a Layout Grid and Constraints together is one of Fig-
ma’s lesser-known features, most likely because there is no
visual indication of the connection in the app UI. This feature
can be discovered only by accident or from reading documen-
tation.

A Layout Grid is not just a visual aid. When applied to the
frame, it helps Figma align nested objects when the frame
is being resized. If you use stretchy grids, an object’s Con-
straints will be based on the nearest column or row of the grid
instead of the frame. This helps maintain fixed gutters and
results in more realistic scaling behavior.

Let’s return to our email app example, and apply a Layout
Grid with Columns to the toolbar.




Icons are aligned to the columns, and their Constraints are
set to Center and Center. When we change app orientation to
the landscape now, they’re properly distributed on the tool-
bar.
Creating Layouts                                               90




Before & After applying a Layout Grid.


The same technique can be used for maintaining fixed gutters
and margins when resizing the frame.
Creating Layouts                                                91




In the top example, a Layout Grid wasn’t used, and both hor-
izontal and vertical Constraints on the green blocks were set
to Scale. When the parent frame is resized, both gutters and
margins are scaled proportionally. On the bottom example, a
Layout Grid was defined with stretchy columns and grids, and
green blocks’ constraints were set to Left-Right and Top-Bot-
tom. When resized, all objects stick to the grid.
Creating Layouts                                                  92



Rulers and Guides
Rulers and Guides are indispensable when you need to pre-
cisely position objects in the design.

First, you need to turn Rulers on by clicking on the Zoom
percentage in the top-right corner of the screen and enabling
them in the menu. Alternatively, use a quick Shift-R keyboard
shortcut.




With rulers visible on the top and left side of the canvas, you
can create a new guide by clicking on the ruler and pulling
it out to the desired place. Figma can place guides either on
the canvas to help organize individual artboards, or inside
top-level frames. When placed inside a frame, guides will be
attached to it even when you move the frame around the can-
vas. Guides can be deleted either by dragging them out of the
screen, or single-clicking on them (the guide will turn blue)
and pressing Delete on the keyboard.
Creating Layouts                                                93


Guides are extremely valuable to developers, but they can’t
be exported to the project documentation. Luckily, there is a
nice plugin Redlines, that can be used for annotating design
mockups during the handoff process. It can outline objects
and measure dimensions while providing full control over the
look of redline elements.
Creating Layouts                                                  94



Auto Layout
Auto Layout makes frames responsive to their content. By
defining how children are laid out in a frame, Auto Layout
dynamically updates the frame whenever content or the num-
ber of children is changed. Buttons can grow or shrink with
their text, menus can resize when new items are added, and
lists can be easily rearranged. It was released only at the end
of 2019, but has already redefined how teams design and orga-
nize their components.

If you’re familiar with web development and CSS, Auto Lay-
out is based on a concept of the Flexbox layout. That shared
foundation makes it easier to translate design mockups to real
interfaces on the web.


ADDING AUTO LAYOUT

Auto Layout can be applied only to frames. If you apply it to a
group, it will be converted to a frame. When applied to a se-
lection of objects, a new parent frame with Auto Layout will
be created.

To add Auto Layout, make a selection and click the plus icon
in a section of the Properties panel. Alternatively, use key-
board shortcut Shift-A or a context menu item “Add Auto Lay-
out”.

It’s worth noting that Auto Layout can be added to an object
even when the option is not present in the Properties panel.
The best example is building a resizable button — create a text
layer, add Auto Layout with a shortcut or through the context
menu, and then style a newly created parent frame.

Auto Layout can be removed by clicking on the minus icon
in the same panel, or selecting “Remove Auto Layout” in the
menu (Option-Shift-A). Keep in mind that after Auto Layout
rearranged objects, their original place can’t be restored.
Creating Layouts                                                  95


PROPERTIES OF AN AUTO LAYOUT FRAME

Because frames with Auto Layout respond to their content,
some of the normal frame properties won’t be available any-
more:

•	 Width and height can’t be set manually. Depending on the
   resizing mode, either one or both of the properties will be
   set automatically.
•	 Constraints that stretch or change the frame’s dimensions
   (Left & Right, Top & Bottom, and Scale) can’t be selected.
•	 Layout Grid can’t be applied.




Properties of a regular frame vs. Auto Layout.


Now, let’s look at Auto Layout properties of the parent frame.

Direction defines which way the frame will be resized when
children are changed or added. Horizontal is great for creating
Creating Layouts                                                    96


buttons with editable text labels or rows of icons. Vertical is a
good fit for lists or menus. If you apply Auto Layout to exist-
ing objects, the direction will be set automatically based on
their flow.

Currently Figma supports only one direction at a time. If you
need to create a grid-like structure, Auto Layout frames can
be nested inside one another.

Resizing controls whether you can adjust a frame’s size on
the axis opposing the direction. The height of frames with
horizontal Auto Layout and the width of frames with vertical
Auto Layout can be fixed or set automatically.

Automatic resizing sets the dimensions of the frame based on
its content. As you add children of different sizes, they will
be laid out in the chosen direction, and the frame will be re-
sized to accommodate them. Your frame will be as big as its
biggest child. With Fixed resizing, frame’s width (for Vertical)
or height (for Horizontal) can be set in the Properties panel,
and children will be distributed within a frame, possibly even
overflowing it.

Padding controls horizontal and vertical whitespace around
the children of the frame. At this time, controlling individual
sides or negative values (that might be used for overlapping)
are not supported.

Spacing Between sets the distance between individual chil-
dren. Thanks to a combination of Padding and Space Be-
tween, you can control spacing on all sides of your Auto Lay-
out children.


PROPERTIES OF AUTO LAYOUT CHILDREN

Because Auto Layout arranges children automatically, some of
their properties can’t be set manually anymore:

•	 Position (X and Y) is set automatically.
•	 Constraints aren’t available. Use order and alignment instead.
Creating Layouts                                                       97


•	 Smart Selection isn’t available.




Properties of a regular object vs. Auto Layout child.


Alignment options for Auto Layout children are limited com-
pared to regular objects. They can be aligned only along the
axis opposing the direction of Auto Layout. In a frame with
the Horizontal Auto Layout, children can be aligned to the
top, center, bottom, or stretched from top to bottom of the
frame. In a frame with the Vertical Auto Layout, they can be
aligned to the left, center, right, or stretched from left to right.

You can shuffle through alignment options with the arrow
keys. In Horizontal layout, use the Up and Down keys to
change alignment between Top, Center, and Bottom, or hold
Option to skip Center and toggle between Top and Bottom
only. In Vertical layout, use Left and Right to toggle between
horizontal alignment options.

Unlike in regular objects, alignment of Auto Layout children
is persistent — once you set the child to be aligned to the
side of the frame, it will stick to it even when resized or rear-
ranged. In a way, it acts more like a Constraint than a normal
alignment tool.
Creating Layouts                                                                                    98


You can quickly change Order of elements by moving the
child with arrows in the Properties panel or on the keyboard.
Use Left and Right in Horizontal layout, Up and Down in Ver-
tical; Hold the Option key to move the object to the beginning
or the end. Changing their order in Auto Layout will also up-
date the order in the Layers panel, and vice versa.

Another way to change both Alignment and Order is by drag-
ging an object inside a frame.

It’s worth noting that as Auto Layout frames can be nested,
the same frame can be both a parent and a child simultane-
ously. In that case, both sets of properties will be available,
except stretching from side to side. While regular children
of an Auto Layout frame can be stretched, a child with its
own Auto Layout must resize only in response to its content.
Stretching it would be against the core principle of how Auto
Layout works.


Why Layers Appear in Reverse Order Inside Auto Layout
Frames?
There has been some confusion about why layers appear in
reverse order inside an Auto Layout frame. Figma’s Director
of Product Sho Kuwamoto explained their thought process
in a Twitter thread 5 shortly after launch. I’ll summarize it to    5  https://twitter.com/skuwamoto/
                                                                    status/1204261358428012545
clarify the situation, but I encourage you to read the original
for additional details.

First, let’s consider normal layers. When you duplicate a lay-
er, the new one goes above the old one so you can see it. The
order of layers in the panel reflects their Z-axis, so the new
layer will be above the old one there as well. That behavior is
standard for all design tools.

Auto Layout introduced a connection between visual order of
objects and order of their layers in the Layers panel. The first
object (left/top) is always on the bottom of the layers list, and
the last object (right/bottom) is on the top. This is consistent
with traditional layers’ behavior, but misleading when you
Creating Layouts                                                       99


consider that the Western world is reading and counting from
left to right, top to bottom. If you have an Auto Layout frame
with an ordered list 1–2–3, its layers will be ordered 3–2–1.

Sho Kuwamoto shared some ideas on how this can be fixed in
his thread. Ultimately, their team decided to keep things tra-
ditional and familiar, but they might consider adding a prefer-
ence to change this in the future.


Using Text Layers in Auto Layout
Using text blocks inside Auto Layout is worth discussing sep-
arately. As you may remember, text blocks have three resizing
modes — Fixed Size, Auto Width (height is fixed), and Auto
Height (width is fixed). There are many parallels between
these resizing modes and frames with and without Auto Lay-
out.

Pay attention to what text mode you use inside an Auto Lay-
out frame. Your button won’t grow or shrink to match its la-
bel if the text is set to Fixed Size or Auto Height. A bullet list
made with vertical Auto Layout won’t resize its child to fit an
extra line of text if the text object is set to Auto Width.




Auto Height vs. Auto Width text inside a vertical Auto Layout frame.
Creating Layouts                                                     100


If you imagine that characters and words are individual ob-
jects, text blocks can be considered a version of Auto Layout
frames. Both regular frames and Fixed Size text blocks can be
resized only manually. Frames with Vertical Auto Layout and
Auto Height text blocks have a fixed width, but their height
depends on the content. The same is true for fixed height and
fluid width of a Horizontal Auto Layout and Auto Width text
block. Parallels like this may not be intrinsically practical, but
they help understand the connection between the tools.


Irregular Spacing Between Components
Consistent spacing between items may not work for every de-
sign. In the example on the left, spacing is set to 16 pixels, but
the resulting gap between the title and first paragraph is too
large. On the right, spacing is set to zero, but instead, I added
custom spacer components in two sizes — 8 pixels after the ti-
tle, and 16 pixels around the image. At any moment, I can hide
spacers by setting the component’s opacity to zero and enjoy
all the benefits of Auto Layout with the flexibility of custom
spacing. If you decide to go this route, I recommend creating
a set of components sized according to a consistent scale.




Using spacers with Auto Layout.
Creating Layouts                                                   101


ADDING, REMOVING, AND HIDING CHILDREN

You can add new objects to a frame with Auto Layout by drag-
ging them in. A blue line will indicate the location and align-
ment of the object inside a frame. Figma will not let you drag
in an object larger than a parent frame, but that behavior can
be overwritten by pressing the Command key (Ctrl on Win-
dows).

Alternatively, you can duplicate existing children by select-
ing Edit → Duplicate in the menu or pressing Command-D
(Ctrl-D).

Objects can be removed from an Auto Layout frame by drag-
ging them out or selecting and pressing the Delete or Back-
space key.

Hiding an object will make it disappear and change the order
and move all other children. That can be done by clicking on
an eye icon next to layer’s name or pressing Command-Shift-H.
This is a powerful way to create reusable components with
multiple states, but we’ll get to that soon. If you need to hide
a child but keep a gap in its place (as in a spacer example
above), set layer’s opacity to zero.
Creating Layouts                                                                                         102



Pages
Pages provide a way to organize individual screens and com-
ponents inside a file. Specific ways to use (or not use) pages
are up to you and your team, but here are some ideas:

•	 Keep previous iterations or rejected versions on a separate page.
•	 Dedicate one page to your design system and components.
•	 “Experiments” page, so your team won’t comment on un-
   finished work.
•	 Organize larger projects by feature or section.

Naming conventions are highly individual. Personally, I like to
name pages starting with emoji to make them easier to scan.

The need to use pages depends on the complexity of your
project. For smaller projects, keeping everything on a single
canvas can make things clearer and easier to manage. It’s easy
to add pages and rearrange a project once it gets to the point
when extra complexity is justified. Objects can be moved be-
tween pages using the “Move to Page” command in the con-
text menu. You can use shortcuts Fn-Arrow Up and Fn-Arrow
Down to navigate between pages.

Let’s see how large teams use pages to organize their files and
projects.

Dropbox splits their design system libraries into pages for lay-       6  Design Tooling at Scale
                                                                       https://dropbox.design/article/
out, typography, OS-specific icons, components, and in some
                                                                       design-tooling-at-scale
cases, fully-composed screens: 6

    The component pages in these kits are the most
    utilized portion of our library ecosystem and are
    organized into quickly-scannable sticker sheets.
    The organization of these sheets is important — in
    recent internal user testing, we discovered that
    about half of Dropbox product designers prefer to
    copy and paste directly from these sheets, rather
    than using Figma’s Assets panel in their files.
Creating Layouts                                                                                  103




Component pages from Dropbox Web library.
Image by Adam Noffsinger © Dropbox


Spotify wrote an extensive post 7 on organizing work inside        7  How Spotify Organises Work in
                                                                   Figma to Improve Collaboration
Figma. They use a single spec file per product that represents
                                                                   https://spotify.design/article/how-
a single source of truth, and inside it use pages for all of the   spotify-organises-work-in-figma-to-
features:                                                          improve-collaboration


     “Where’s the latest design?” is a message we send
     and receive far too often. Similar to how we’re
     bringing visibility to exploration work through our
     new Team and Project structures, we also wanted
     to pull specs out from individual files and into the
     open. Each Team (i.e. product) now has a single
     spec file, and within those files are pages that rep-
     resent each of our features. As a designer hones in
     on a solution, they move their work into these cen-
     tralized specs to document their decisions.
Creating Layouts                                                                                   104




Feature page in a Spotify spec file.
© Spotify


Hosts of Design Details podcast Brian Lovin (GitHub) and
Marshall Bock (YouTube) discussed their approaches to Fig-
ma organization and handoff process in episode “Versioning        8  Episode 340: Versioning and
                                                                  Handoff in Figma
and Handoff in Figma” 8.
                                                                  https://designdetails.fm/
                                                                  episodes/318485
Brian uses a new file for every version of GitHub’s mobile app,
and inside them creates an individual page for every new fea-
ture and improvement that will be a part of that release. That
way, the team has a dedicated file for every sprint, and every
page contains a discrete change that will be shipped.

Marshall creates a line to separate pages that are final from
pages that are exploratory. That indicates to the team that
these pages are work in progress and shouldn’t be shipped. He
likes to use emoji to indicate the status of the pages as well,
                  🚀                       🔍
for instance, for ready to be shipped or for explorations
and experiments.

Ultimately, it all comes down to communication and conven-
tions within your team. It’s easy enough to experiment with
Creating Layouts                                                     105


different approaches, and over time you’ll settle on a system
that works for you and your team.


CUSTOM FILE THUMBNAIL

By default, the first page of the file is shown as a thumbnail in
the file browser. When there are multiple screens or artboards
on the first page, everything becomes tiny, and the thumbnail
gets hard to scan. The problem is even worse when your proj-
ect has multiple files with similar content. Luckily, the team
at Figma thought about this and provided a way to define cus-
tom file thumbnails.

On any page, create a new frame with dimensions 1920 × 960.
The thumbnails’ width in the file browser is changing based
on the window size, but the center 1600 pixels of the thumb-
nail is the safe zone that will always be visible. After designing
a clear and easy-to-scan thumbnail, right-click on a frame and
select “Set as Thumbnail” in the context menu. The frame will
get a special icon, and the file’s thumbnail will be updated.




File thumbnail.
Creating Layouts                                                      106




Thumbnails in the File Browser.


To remove a custom thumbnail, right-click on the frame and
select “Restore Default Thumbnail” from the context menu.

Consider designing a custom template for your thumbnails
and adding it to the Team Library. It may include things spe-
cific to your needs, like a status of the design (finished or live,
in progress, archived), ticket number, or the iteration’s ver-
sion. This way, your whole team will be on the same page and
can avoid contributing to or implementing the wrong version
of the file.
Creating Layouts                                                    107



Links
Links provide a new way to navigate within Figma. They can
point to individual frames, pages, files, and projects with-
in Figma, or even to external resources. With links, you can
create navigation within a file or collect all relevant docs and
resources for a larger project in one place.

The Link can be added to an entire text layer or a selection of
text within the layer. Linking other objects is not supported at
this moment.

To add a link, select text or a text layer and click the “Cre-
ate Link” icon in the toolbar. Alternatively, use Command-K
(Ctrl-K) keyboard shortcut. If a URL is already in the clipboard,
you can even skip the dialog and just paste it (Command-V) to
create a link.

Links to individual frames and pages can be copied in their
context menu. Link to a file can be copied either from Share
dialog when it’s open or from its context menu when you’re
inside a project. Even the whole project can be linked by
copying a link from its Share button.
   Building
a Design System
Building a Design System                                                                          109


So far, we discussed creating basic elements and organizing
them into flexible modules and layouts. Only one piece of the
puzzle is left untouched — figuring out how to reuse these
modules, layouts, and properties of the elements across the
whole project.

In this section, we’ll talk about creating reusable components
and sharing properties as styles. Components, in particular,
are very flexible, so we’ll go through different approaches to
build and organize them. Then, we’ll look at building a Team
Library from components and styles that can be used across
all your files and projects. This will provide all the building
blocks for creating a solid design system shared by the whole
team.

In the book “Design Systems” 1, Alla Kholmatova writes about      1  Meet “Design Systems”, A New
                                                                  Smashing Book
establishing a design system in the organization:
                                                                  https://www.smashingmagazine.
                                                                  com/design-systems-book/
     How does a team start thinking about design more
     systematically? Typically, when they notice issues
     with their current workflow. Designers become
     frustrated always solving the same problems, or
     not being able to implement their designs prop-
     erly. Developers are tired of custom styling every
     component and dealing with a messy codebase.
     Both struggle to meet the deadlines and demands
     of a growing product. Without shared design lan-
     guage and practices, collaboration is difficult.

The way these tools are built and how I think of them is heav-
ily influenced by software engineering. You don’t need to
know how to code to use them, but getting familiar with the
tools and concepts used by developers will help you speak the
same language. Bridging the gap between design and develop-
ment is good for everyone, but the real winners are users who
end up with a more coherent and well-built product.
Building a Design System                                                                       110



Components
Components are objects that can be reused across the project.
They let you split the design into independent, reusable piec-
es to ensure consistency and maintainability.

Design apps had the concept of symbols for a long time. At
first, they were reusable objects that couldn’t really be cus-
tomized. Things started to change when React gained pop-
ularity for building interfaces around 2014. It introduced
designers with front-end skills to component-based develop-
ment, which gave them full control over the presentation and
behavior of individual components. Coming back to primitive
symbols in design apps was painful, and so from 2014 to 2016,
all major apps stepped up their game.

Figma was still very young when it added components, which
helped avoid many mistakes and limitations of other apps.
Even the name of the feature suggests a transition from tools
of the past to modern design and development practices. Fig-
ma Principal Designer Rasmus Andersson said it nicely while      2  Components in Figma
                                                                 https://www.figma.com/blog/
introducing components 2:
                                                                 components-in-figma/

     As someone who comes from a background in both
     design and engineering, I’ve noticed the way we
     design is very different than the way we build soft-
     ware. People expect complex user interfaces that
     are alive, connected and always improving. How
     can we keep up as designers? Engineers have al-
     ready figured this out.

Components in Figma are based on frames, but duplicating
them creates new instances rather than disconnected copies.
Changes to the original main component translate to all in-
stances, which can have their own overrides. Just as frames,
components can be nested to form complex modules from
individual pieces. That’s a quick summary of how components
work, but now let’s look at them more closely.
Building a Design System                                          111


MAIN COMPONENTS AND INSTANCES

Components can be created from any layers, groups, or
frames. Internally, they are based on frames, so if you turn
one into a component, all its properties will be preserved.
Creating a component from a group will convert it to a frame,
and collections of objects will be wrapped in one.

To create a component, make a selection and click icon Create
Component in the toolbar, or press Option-Command-K on the
keyboard. You can also select the command from a context
menu.

That creates a Main Component (in the past known as Mas-
ter), which defines the properties of the component. It has a
quadruple diamond icon, and its name is shown in bold in the
Layers panel. All main components also appear in the Assets
panel. You can quickly switch between Layers and Assets pan-
els using Option-1 and Option-2 shortcuts.

An Instance is a linked copy of the component that inherits
its properties. Any change made to the main component will
also apply to all its instances. To create an instance, use one
of the ways:

•	 Duplicate the main component (Command-D or drag with
   Option/Alt).
•	 Drag instance out of the Assets panel.
•	 Copy and paste within one file.

Instances have a diamond icon, and their name is shown in
regular font. The purple color sets main components and
instances apart from regular objects, both in the Layers panel
and in their bounding boxes.

You can quickly return to the main component from an in-
stance by clicking on the “Go to Main Component” icon in
the Properties panel.

By default, main components remain in the place where they
were created. This makes it easy to see and tweak them in the
Building a Design System                                             112


context of your design, but may be unusual if you’re coming
from Sketch where symbols have a dedicated page. (See Com-
ponent Page plugin if you miss that.) Larger projects also ben-
efit from having a dedicated page or file with the whole design
system in one place. As a rule of thumb, I move components
to a separate place only when I need to use them on more
than one screen. Until then, I keep them in place to simplify
editing and reduce overhead.


NAMING AND ORGANIZATION

As your projects grow, so will the number of components. It’s
important to have a consistent structure to keep them orga-
nized. Ultimately, your team should come up with naming and
organizational conventions and then follow them rigorously.
Looking for components in an unorganized mess is a good
way to waste time rebuilding duplicates.

In the Assets panel, components are grouped by their source
and path. For now, we will focus on Local components and get
to components from Team Libraries in another chapter. The
path to a component will follow a general structure of File /
Page / Frame / Component Name.

Pages will be displayed alphabetically and ignore their manu-
al sorting order. If you have only one page in a file, it won’t be
a part of the structure.

Components created inside a frame will show its name in the
path. That’s handy if you keep some main components on the
screens they belong to, or group related components together
(i.e., “UI controls” frame to keep all the standard form con-
trols together on a dedicated page). Avoid keeping common
components in random frames — it will be hard to remember
that the Button component is inside the Dashboard frame.

Component name can contain slashes to group related com-
ponents. For instance, if you have a set of icons, you can name
Building a Design System                                            113


your components “Icon / Add”, “Icon / Remove”, and “Icon /
Like” to keep them all together.

In the Component section of the Properties panel, you can
write a description of the component. It will be displayed as
a tooltip when you hover over it in the Assets and Inspect
tabs, but more importantly, it will be indexed by search. This
is a great place to add alternative names, so you can find your
“Like” icon by keywords “heart”, “love”, or “favorite”. The
search field is available on top of the Assets panel.

Aside from keeping the Assets panel organized, your structure
and name grouping help Figma determine Related Compo-
nents. To be considered related, components must be ar-
ranged within the same frame or be a part of the same name
group. In this example, all the logos used in the project will be
shown as Related Components.

While we’re on this, it’s worth noting that Figma supports
renaming multiple layers, groups, or frames at once. Select
them and either pick Rename in the context menu, or press
the Command-R keyboard shortcut to open a dialog. You can
change multiple layers to the same name, add a prefix or a suf-
fix to existing layers’ names, or add numeration. By using the
Match field, you can update only a part of the name. This is
especially handy if you want to rename a group name in mul-
tiple layers, i.e., change “Banners/…” to “Ads/…”. The Rename
form even supports Regular Expressions, if you’re familiar
with using them.


SWAP INSTANCES

Components can be easily swapped in three different ways —
by finding a replacement in the Instance menu, by dragging
a component from the Assets panel, or by using the context
menu. This is a great way to quickly switch between icons, UI
controls, and other related components.
Building a Design System                                           114


The Instance menu is the easiest way to swap components. It
provides quick access to related components but also lets you
navigate to other hierarchies and groups, search for compo-
nents, and even switch between libraries.

You may also drag a component from the Assets panel and
drop it above the instance you want to swap while holding the
modifier key. If the component isn’t nested within another
frame or component, hold the Option (Alt) modifier key, oth-
erwise use Option-Command (Alt-Control on Windows).

Finally, the most limited but often the fastest option is to use
the context menu. Right-click on the instance and select one
of the related components in the “Swap Instance” menu.


OVERRIDES

Overrides let you change properties of an instance to use the
same component in more than one way. They play a big role
in making Figma components more powerful than a previous
generation of symbols in other design apps. Here are some ex-
amples of using overrides:

•	 Button component used with different text labels. Build it
   with Auto Layout, and every instance will auto-resize to its
   text label size.
•	 Applying custom color to an icon component.
•	 Changing a photo in an avatar component.
•	 Form with different states of the controls and values of the
   fields.

Not all properties of an instance can be changed, or it would
lose any resemblance and connection to the main component.
You can change these properties:

•	 Size of the instance
•	 Text content and styles
•	 Fill, Stroke, and Effects
Building a Design System                                           115


•	 Visibility and opacity of nested layers
•	 Swap nested components

Some properties can’t be overridden:

•	 Size or position of nested layers
•	 Layer order
•	 Constraints
•	 Layout Grids

You can see and reset all overrides applied to the instance or a
nested layer from the “Instance options” menu in the Proper-
ties panel.

What happens when you override some properties of an in-
stance, but then swap it with another instance? Figma will
attempt to preserve your changes, but layer names and hierar-
chy need to match between the current instance and the in-
stance you’re selecting.

Sometimes you’ll make changes to an instance and then re-
alize that the whole component should be updated. You can
push changes from an instance back to the main components
by using the “Push Overrides to Main Component” command
from the “Instance options“ menu in the Properties panel.
That will also update all other instances of that component.
“Push Overrides to Main Component” is supported only
when main component is in the same file as an instance.


DETACHING INSTANCES

When you need to change an Instance beyond supported
overrides, it’s time to Detach it from the component. That
will turn it into a regular Frame and remove the connection
between it and the main component. The instance can be
detached using the “Detach Instance” command in the “In-
stance options” dropdown menu in the Properties panel, a
context menu, or shortcut Option-Command-B (Ctrl-B on
Windows).
Building a Design System                                                                                 116


Be careful! Every time you detach an instance, you end up
with a disconnected frame with some properties of the orig-
inal component. Consider building your more complex com-
ponents by combining simpler swappable components. This
way, it’ll be easier to customize an instance without detaching
it from the main component. Generally, consider detaching
instances a “code smell” 3 of the project — a characteristic that   3  Code smell
                                                                    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_
possibly indicates a deeper problem. On an Organization plan,
                                                                    smell
Figma can even track how often instances are detached with
Design System Analytics to suggest when components aren’t
flexible enough.

If you no longer need a component, but want to keep its ob-
jects in place, it can be deleted by detaching. Create an in-
stance of the component and detach it, then delete an original
main component. The component will disappear from the
Assets panel.

If there were other instances of the deleted main component,
they would end up with a broken link to the main component.
In that case, you can either detach them as well, or use the
“Restore Main Component” command in the instance section
of the Properties panel.


PRINCIPLE OF SINGLE RESPONSIBILITY

As we established before, components borrow a lot from
software engineering. It’s not surprising then that principles
used by software engineers for decades can now be applied
to the design of the components. One of them, the principle of      4  Single-responsibility principle
                                                                    https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single-
single-responsibility 4, states that every component should be
                                                                    responsibility_principle
responsible for a single part of software functionality and that
responsibility should be entirely encapsulated by it.

This principle is a little harder to apply to design components
than to programming functions, but we can try. If you’re fa-
miliar with programming, I like to think of components as
functions and overrides as arguments (or props in React).
When we’re adding an override, we’re not changing the com-
Building a Design System                                            117


ponent itself, but just calling the function with a different set
of arguments. Let’s look at the example.




The header component for Postmark.


This header is built from smaller components. We can pres-
ent its structure as a nested list.

•	 Header
  •	 Logo
  •	 Navigation
     •	 Nav Link / Default
     •	 Nav Link / Default
     •	 Nav Link / Default
     •	 Nav Link / Active
•	 Subnav Bar
  •	 Subnav Items
     •	 Subnav Link with Icon / Active
        •	 Icon / Message Streams
        •	 Text label
     •	 Subnav Link with Icon / Default
        •	 Icon / Templates
        •	 Text label
     •	 Subnav Link with Icon / Default
        •	 Icon / API Tokens
        •	 Text label
     •	 Subnav Link with Icon / Default
Building a Design System                                            118


        •	 Icon / Settings
        •	 Text label

Header component can be changed only to reorganize how
Logo and Navigation are laid out on a yellow bar. Navigation is
responsible for a number of Nav Links and spacing between
them, but not their content or presentation.

Subnav Link with Icon / Default is responsible only for the lay-
out of an icon and text. The Active version reuses it, overrid-
ing color and adding a border at the bottom. I can edit text,
but the component defines its style, or I can swap the icon
component, but its content is not a concern of the Subnav
Link with Icon.

Because every component is responsible only for its own
thing, I can change the style of a Text Label, and it will be ap-
plied both to Default and Active states of the Subnav Link with
Icon. I can change the spacing in Navigation by tweaking its
Auto Layout, and that won’t affect its content on any of the
mockups. It may feel like you’re doing extra work by abstract-
ing smaller pieces of the UI, but it will be worth it as soon as
your project gets slightly bigger.


INHERITANCE

Inheritance is another important principle in software engi-
neering, and I briefly touched on it in a previous section. Con-
sider these two components.




They are constructed from two nested components, Icon and
Text Label. How can we maintain consistent spacing and lay-
Building a Design System                                          119


out between Default and Active versions of the component? If
we build them independently, eventually they will get out of
sync.

We want an Active state to inherit Default layout and spac-
ing, and then apply its own styles on top of it. That can be
achieved by creating an instance of the Default component,
changing its colors with overrides, adding a border on the
bottom, and then wrapping it all into a new component for an
active state.

With this approach, we’ll follow both single responsibility and
inheritance principles — Active component will be responsible
only for an active style because it inherits Default, which is
responsible only for layout. Win-win!


VISIBILITY OVERRIDES

Some components may have a large number of versions. Con-
sider tweets.




In addition to a text, they may include a link thumbnail,
image, audio, video, or even another tweet. If that wasn’t
Building a Design System                                           120


                           ♥
enough, there could be “ Username liked” or “Promoted”
badges on top and bottom as well. How do you manage all
these cases?

The common approach is to create a main component that in-
cludes all the modules, and then use layers visibility overrides
to create an instance for every version. This is where Auto
Layout shines, as it treats hidden elements as removed from
the flow and rearranges all children of the frame. In the end,
create new components for the instance versions to easily re-
use them in the future, i.e., Tweet / Quote Tweet, Tweet / Liked
Tweet, Tweet / Promoted Link, etc.

If later you’ll need to adjust the size of the avatar or change
the font of the username, it all can be done in the single main
component. This approach is nicely based on two principles
we just discussed.


VARIANTS

There is a better way to organize related components than
just grouping them by name. Variants let you combine com-
ponents sharing the same properties but with different com-
binations of values into a single component set. Image if you
could switch between variants of the previous tweet compo-
nent just by setting values of its properties.

Common examples of variants include buttons, inputs, no-
tifications, navigation menus, and any other sets where all
components are not completely unique but built on a shared
foundation. That said, not every group of components has
to be turned into variants. Figma doesn’t recommend using
variants to group different icons, although they can be used to
combine different sizes of the same icon.

Variants simplify the Assets panel by significantly reducing
the number of components and map design components
more closely to components in code. For example, buttons
in design systems will usually have separate components for
Building a Design System                                          121


every type, size, and state, while in code, they will be imple-
mented as a single Button component accepting different
properties. Talk to developers to ensure that your choice of
language and properties is consistent between design and
codebase.

Component sets can be one- or multi-dimensional. The
one-dimensional component set has a single property with
two or more values (e.g., Button with Default, Hover, Pressed,
and Disabled states), while the multi-dimensional set has
multiple properties with different options available for each
property (e.g., Primary and Secondary Button, each available
in several states, with or without icons).




Multi-dimensional component set


Combining existing components with shared properties into
variants is pretty straightforward:

1.	 Review component names. When related components are
    grouped using forward slashes in their names, the first
Building a Design System                                           122


  group will be interpreted as the name of the component
  set. Each next group is treated as a new property with val-
  ues populated from names at that level. For example, com-
  ponents Button / Primary / Default, Button / Primary / Hover,
  and Button / Secondary / Default will become a component
  set Button with two untitled properties with values Primary
  / Secondary and Default / Hover. (You can organize and re-
  name them later, but it’s easier to start with a solid founda-
  tion.)
2.	Organize components into one- or multi-dimensional
   structure on canvas. Consider adding labels outside of the
   component set for future reference. The top left compo-
   nent will be used as a default variant and represent the
   entire set in the Assets panel.
3.	 Select the components and click the “Combine as Variants”
    button in the sidebar. Notice that all selected components
    turned into variants of the component set and now have a
    single diamond icon.
4.	Figma automatically creates variant properties from name
   groups and populates their values based on names, but it
   doesn’t know the names of the properties. It will name
   the first property Variant, then number them sequentially:
   Property 2, Property 3, and so on. Rename property names in
   the Variants panel.
5.	 Binary values like On/Off, True/False, With Something/With-
    out Something, etc. can be represented as toggle switches.
    Use True and False or On and Off for such values.
6.	Properties can be reordered by dragging a handle appearing
   on hover to the left of the property name.

It’s also possible to create new variants from scratch, al-
though the experience is a little bit more cumbersome:

1.	 Start with creating a component.
2.	Click the “Add New Variant” button in the Properties panel.
3.	 Name the value and change the default property name.
Building a Design System                                            123


4.	If you’re creating a multi-dimensional component set, add
   more properties by selecting “Add New Property“ in the
   “More Options” dropdown in the Variants section.
5.	 Add values by selecting a variant inside a component set
    and either entering a new value or clicking “Add new…” in
    the property dropdown.

Now when you turned individual components into a compo-
nent set with variants, it can be used as any other component.
The main practical difference is that the component set can’t
be duplicated or copy-pasted to create an instance, so drag it
from the Assets panel.


CREATING COMPONENTS IN BULK

If you ever import a large collection of icons or objects into
Figma and need to create components from them, there is a
better way than doing this manually one by one. I’ve done this
before. It’s not fun. Select multiple objects, and you will no-
tice a dropdown arrow appear next to “Create Component”
button in the toolbar.

Click an arrow and select “Create Multiple Components”, so
Figma can create a component from each object you selected.
This is not something you’ll use often, but it will save a lot of
time when you do.


VERSIONING COMPONENTS

If you’re working on a project for a long time, you’ll eventual-
ly need to redesign one of the components from scratch. Al-
ternatively, you may import a project from Sketch, and auto-
matic conversion of symbols into components won’t use any
of the powerful tools Figma has to offer. What to do when
you can’t just update an existing component, and it’s al-
ready used across the project?
Building a Design System                                             124


In a situation like this, I’ll create a new version of the compo-
nent and manually replace old instances with the new ones.
The overwrites will be lost, but sometimes it’s faster to co-
py-paste data than try to migrate everything. Here are some
tips on making this process easier:

                           🛑
•	 Create a new page “ Deprecated” and move deprecated
   main components to it.
•	 To draw attention to deprecated instances, cover the main
   component with a bright half-transparent layer.




•	 Use Instance Finder plugin to find all instances of the dep-
   recated component.
•	 After doing a large cleanup or migration, it’s worth running
   Unused Components to see if any of the components can
   be removed.
•	 In a large project with hundreds of screens, it’s not realistic
   to update all instances at once. This may be fine, as long as
   your team can easily tell that the component is deprecated
   and knows where to find a replacement.
Building a Design System                                        125


Creating a new version of the component is also useful if you
want to explore different design directions. Just remember to
clean them up when you settle on the best one.
Building a Design System                                             126



Styles
Components and styles are like yin and yang of the design
system — one is responsible for content and functionality,
while another is all about appearance. Styles allow you to de-
fine and reuse a set of properties across the project:

•	 Color Styles (including solid colors, gradients, and images)
•	 Text Styles
•	 Effect Styles
•	 Layout Grid Styles

Once defined, styles can be reused and changed globally
across the whole project. It’s a great way to make design con-
sistent and uniform.


CREATING STYLES

Styles for different properties can be created and managed
in the same way. Select an object with a solid color, fill, ef-
fect, text style, or grid you want to reuse as a style. Inside the
Properties panel section, click the Style icon with four dots to
open the Styles dropdown.

In the dropdown, click the plus icon to create a style. Styles
created in the current file will be shown on the top. Just like
components, style names can contain slashes to group related
styles. For instance, you can have multiple headers organized
like “Headers / H1”, “Headers / H2”, etc.

One of the popular approaches is to pick names that commu-
nicate roles or functions of styles rather than just describ-
ing them. There are certain benefits to organizing styles this
way. For example, if the design has a specific accent color, it’s
much harder to accidentally pick its wrong shade when Color
Style is clearly named “Accent”. It’s also more meaningful and
future-proof — the color itself may eventually change, but the
name will stay the same.
Building a Design System                                                                         127


While this approach works great for Text Styles, it may be
tricky to follow for colors on a larger project with more exten-
sive visual language. On Postmark 5, we have an extensive col-      5  https://postmarkapp.com

or palette with numerical names for shades of colors.




For more ideas on naming conventions, I highly recommend
exploring large organizations’ design systems in the Figma
Community. There are different approaches, and it’s best if
you settle on what works best for your team and projects.


APPLYING STYLES

To review all styles used in your file, click on the canvas. In
the Properties panel, they will be listed in the Local Styles
section and organized by type. Notice how icons of Effect
Styles reflect positions of the shadows — I love Figma’s atten-
tion to small details!

That’s a good place to review, organize, delete, and modify
styles. The order in this list will be reflected when you get to
use them, so keep them organized by dragging.

To apply a style to an object, select it and click the Style icon
in the Properties panel. Select one of the existing styles in the
Styles panel. Later, you can switch between styles the same
way.
Building a Design System                                             128


When using a color picker, you may notice that a new group
Local Colors appears in a dropdown next to Document Col-
ors. It may look like just another way to apply Color Styles,
but it’s not. The color value will be used, but the style will not
be applied when selected this way. Still, it’s a convenient way
to create a new color based on an existing Color Style.


MODIFYING STYLES

Changes can be made only to Local Styles of the file. We’ll
discuss Team Library in the next chapter, but keep this in
mind when some styles can’t be changed.

To modify a style, select an object using it, open the style
dropdown, and click the Edit Style button. Alternatively,
switch to the canvas and click the Edit Style button next to a
style name in the list.

After you make changes, they will be applied to all the in-
stances of the style in the file.


DETACHING STYLES

Like components, styles can be detached when they need to
be modified without affecting all instances. The connection
to the style will be lost, and you can freely modify the proper-
ties of an object without affecting other instances. To detach
a style, select an object and click the broken link icon next to
the style name.
Building a Design System                                            129



Team Library
Most projects will eventually grow out of a single file. We dis-
cussed how large teams organize their pages, files, and proj-
ects in the chapter on Pages, but here are some common ways
to break down a larger project into multiple files:

•	 A file with project identity and brand colors.
•	 Separate files for a marketing website and an app.
•	 One file per platform an app exists on (iOS, Android).
•	 Key features or sections organized into individual files.
•	 A new file for every new version of the app.

By default, components and styles are local to the file they
were created in. To reuse them across files and projects,
you can publish them to the Team Library. This universally
available library can help maintain a consistent look and feel
across all parts of the project.

Currently, publishing components to a Team Library is avail-
able only on paid and educational plans. Publishing Styles is
available even on a free Starter plan.


PUBLISH TO THE TEAM LIBRARY

If you already have a file with components and styles that you
want to publish to a Team Library, you can do this from the
Publish Library modal. It can be opened in two ways:

•	 Click on the canvas to reset the selection, then click the ar-
   row next to the file name in the toolbar, and select “Publish
   Styles and Components” from the options.
•	 Switch to the Assets tab in the Layers panel, then click the
   “Team Library” icon with the book on the right (or press
   Option-3 on Mac or Alt-3 on Windows). Inside the Libraries
   window, click the “Publish” button next to the current file
   name.
Building a Design System                                            130


Inside the Publish Library modal, you can add an optional de-
scription that will be saved into Version History, and review a
list of styles and components that will be published.

Try not to pollute your Team Library with styles and compo-
nents specific to just one file. You can choose not to publish
any style or component by right-clicking on its name and se-
lecting “Remove from library”. It will be marked as “Private to
this file”, and your choice will be remembered in the future. If
you change your mind, right-click on it again and select “Add
to library”.

While it gets the job done, I find this method of exclusion
cumbersome — you have to toggle components one by one,
and there is no way to tell if a style or component is part of
the Team Library. A better way is to prefix the name with an
underscore or a period, and they will be excluded automati-
cally. Choice of the symbols is not accidental. Starting a name
with a dot makes a file or a directory hidden on Mac and Unix,
and in programming, starting a function name with an under-
score is a common way to mark it private.


USING A TEAM LIBRARY

To access a style or component from the Team Library, first
you need to enable access to the library that contains it. In the
Assets panel, click the Team Library icon, and enable a spe-
cific library in the Libraries window. You will see a new group
of shared components from that library appear in the Assets
panel. They can be used just like any other local components.

The Assets panel organizes components into multiple groups:

•	 Local components: Components that you created in this File.
   Subgroup “Private to this File” includes components that
   were excluded from publishing to the Team Library.
•	 Used in this File: Components from other files that you have
   already used in this file.
Building a Design System                                            131


•	 Enabled Libraries: Any default libraries that anyone has en-
   abled in a Team or Organization.

Shared styles don’t show up next to Local Styles in the Prop-
erties panel, which may be a little unexpected. You can access
them in the Style panel that is relevant to that specific prop-
erty, i.e., Color, Text, Effect, or Layout Grid. In there, local
styles go first, and every library is separated with a horizontal
ruler.


PUBLISH CHANGES

Eventually, you’ll need to either change or add new shared
components and styles. To avoid accidental changes, publish-
ing changes to the Team Library is a manual process. You’ll
see a notification in the bottom right corner asking you to
publish changes to your Team Library.

Even if you dismiss it, dot indicators next to the Assets tab
and the Team Library icon won’t let you forget about unpub-
lished changes.

Click the “Publish…” button in the notification or inside the
Libraries window, and you’ll see the same Publish Library
modal that we used for an initial publication of the library.
There, you can document your changes and see a list of styles
and components that were changed and will be re-published.
Building a Design System                                           132




Nobody wants their shared components and styles to change
in the middle of their work. After publishing changes to the
Team Library, every file that uses a shared library will need to
manually pull those changes.


ACCEPT UPDATES

When one of the libraries that you are using is changed, you’ll
see a dot indicator next to the Assets tab and a notification
about available updates.
Building a Design System                                         133


After clicking “Review”, you will be presented with all compo-
nents and styles that were changed. You can update them all
at once or individually.




The manual process of publishing and accepting changes may
feel excessive, but it keeps your team accountable and avoids
unpleasant surprises. You can always review the version his-
tory and see who, when, and why made a specific change. This
is exactly why software engineers use version control systems
like Git to manage codebases instead of relying on automati-
cally synced directories like Dropbox or Google Drive.
Building a Design System                                           134


REMOVE FROM A LIBRARY

There are situations when you may want to remove a file from
a Team Library. Maybe there is a newer version of the design
in a different file, or you migrated to a shared design sys-
tem — you can pull it off at any time.

Go to the file you want to remove from the library and open
Team Libraries window from the Assets panel. Click a current
file name, then click button “Unpublish” on the bottom of the
window. After confirming the action, the file will be removed
from your Team Library. All files that use its components and
styles will still use them, but won’t receive updates in the fu-
ture.


MOVE COMPONENTS AND STYLES BETWEEN FILES

Organizing your design system with shared styles and core
components in a separate file may not be easy if all elements
were already created elsewhere. Styles can be moved between
files without breaking the connection, but the process is a
little backward. Moving components will require plugins and
some manual work.

To move a style, start with going to your destination file and
enabling a file containing a style in the Team Library. Shared
styles aren’t shown in the Properties panel, so first, you need
to apply a style from the Team Library to an object. After that,
click the “Edit Style” icon next to its label.

You can’t edit a style shared from another file in place, but
you can either “Go to style definition to edit” or “Move style
definition into this file”. The last option is exactly what we
need, but be careful as the style will be moved without any
confirmation. “Undo” can’t reverse this action, but you can go
to an old source file and repeat the process for moving it back.
Moving a style won’t break the connection, so this process is
not destructible.
Building a Design System                                        135


If you thought moving styles was tricky, wait for components.
Unlike styles, main components can’t be moved between
files. Copying a component from one file to another creates
an instance of that component. Your only option is to turn
that instance into a new main component, share it in your
Team Library, and then manually replace instances of an old
main component with the new one in all files. As discussed in
the chapter “Versioning Components”, you can use Instance
Finder plugin to speed up that process.
Building a Design System                                           136



Version History
Version History lets you review and restore earlier versions
of a file. Figma automatically saves a new version every time
there have been no changes to the file for 30 minutes. This
behavior is very useful as is, but we can make it even better
by manually saving and naming versions. I mentioned Version
History in the chapter on Team Library, but here we’ll look at
it more closely.


VIEW VERSIONS

There are two ways to show Version History:

•	 Use menu item File → Show Version History.
•	 Click on the canvas to reset the selection, then click the
   arrow next to the file name in the toolbar, and select “Show
   Version History” from the options.

Version History will replace the Properties panel on the right
and present a list of edits with timestamps and author names.
You can click on any version to see a preview. To switch back
to the current version, either press Escape or click the “Edit
Current Version” button on the toolbar’s left side.


SAVE AND NAME VERSIONS

It’s hard to stay oriented in a long list of autosaves, and Fig-
ma doesn’t provide any tools for highlighting the differences
between them. To make Version History more practical and
useful in the future, we should do extra work today and give
versions descriptive names.

You can create a new record in Version History manually
without waiting for 30 minutes of inactivity. Either choose
“Save to Version History” from the File menu, use a keyboard
shortcut Command-Option-S, or click on the Plus icon inside
the Version History panel. You’ll be presented with a dialog
familiar from publishing changes to the Team Library.
Building a Design System                                          137




While the dialogs are not exactly the same, both create a new
record in history with a unique name and description.

You can add a name and description to any existing autosave
by selecting it and clicking on the “More Options” icon with
three dots, then choosing “Name This Version”. This ap-
proach won’t let you create granular versions if you worked
on multiple things one after another, but it’s a good way to
organize your existing history.

As we’re moving away from “mockup_final _v2_final_v3_fi-
nal-for-real.psd” file name conventions, it’s time to apply the
best practices for writing version comments from software
engineering to design software:

•	 Summary in the title, more detailed explanation in the de-
   scription.
•	 Write imperative titles: “Fix typo” and not “Fixed typo” or
   “Fixes typo”.
•	 If you use an issue tracker, reference the issue in the de-
   scription.
•	 Use proper capitalization and punctuation.
Building a Design System                                                                     138


Randall Munroe summarized the usual progress of writing
comments quite well in his xkcd comic.

                                                                    © Randall Munroe
                                                                    https://xkcd.com/1296/




RESTORING AND DUPLICATING VERSIONS

Figma provides two ways to travel in history. If you hit a wall
with a wrong direction or accidentally messed up a file, you
can revert to a previous version by selecting it in Version
History, clicking on the “More Options” icon, and choosing
“Restore This Version” from the menu. It’s great that this
action is non-destructive, so it’ll create a new record based on
the selected one without erasing your latest changes.

If you want to explore an alternative direction without losing
your progress on the current one, you can “Duplicate” a ver-
sion. Your current file will be left intact, but an exact copy of
the selected version will be created. It’s worth noting that a
duplicate won’t have the version history, comments, or shar-
ing permissions of the original.
Working With Data
Working With Data                                                   140


The conversation about Figma won’t be complete without
discussing the many ways to use real data in designs. Figma
provides a powerful API that hundreds of developers use to
create great plugins. You can search for them in the Figma
Community, while I’ll outline some popular choices for a few
common use cases. It’s hard to keep up with plugin updates,
so use their documentation for specific usage instructions.


CONTENT REEL

Content Reel is made by Microsoft for building a library of
text strings and images to use in your designs. It comes with
a standard library of icons, avatars, and sample strings like
names, addresses, and phone numbers, but you can also add
your own content. Think of text strings that you use again and
again in the mockups, like names of personas, titles of blog
posts, descriptions of products, etc.

The best part is that you can use Content Reel to quickly fill
your mockups with realistic data. While designing a job board,
I created a list of job openings with multiple instances of a job
listing component. Then, I defined a new group with job ti-
tles in Content Reel, and in one click applied them to a list of
instances as text overrides. Later, I reused the same job title
strings on other screens.
Working With Data                                                 141


GOOGLE SHEETS SYNC

Decoupling content from design is a great way to make your
mockups more maintainable and enable collaboration with
people who won’t be comfortable using a design app. An un-
official Google Sheets Sync plugin lets you keep all your data
in Google Sheets, name layers using a special convention, and
then sync data from Google Sheets to a Figma file in one click.




Image by Dave Williames.


This plugin is especially important if you have multiple repre-
sentations of the same data, like a grid and list view, desktop
and mobile versions of the screen, etc. By following a simple
naming convention, you can keep a single source of truth for
your data and avoid manual updates.


CHART

Plugin Chart uses real or random data to create 16 types of
the most popular charts. (Don’t confuse it with a different
plugin Charts, which only supports random data and six types
of charts.)
Working With Data                                                                                    142




Image by Pavel Kuligin.


You can enter tabular data, link Google Sheets, upload a CSV,
or link a JSON file as a source of data. It’s really powerful and
a huge time-saver if you use charts in your designs, but most
features require a reasonably priced Pro account.


HTML TO FIGMA

Have you ever needed to iterate on the design of a live web-
site for which design files were long lost or outdated? Before
recreating them from scratch, give HTML to Figma a try. The
first time I ran it, the result was about 80% correct. It’s not
perfect, but it’s easier to clean up an auto-converted mockup
than to recreate every asset and element manually.


CUSTOM PLUGINS

Figma’s plugins are relatively easy to build, so some compa-
nies build internal plugins for their specific needs and use cas-
es. They can be distributed as an archive or a Git repository
without making them public in the Community. For example,           1  https://twitter.com/figmadesign/
                                                                    status/1157398695001894912
Microsoft built an internal plugin 1 to switch between color
themes of their many products.
Working With Data                                                                              143




Image by Jackie Chui © Microsoft

                                                               2  Automating the Boring Parts of
Brian Lovin built ten small utility plugins while working on   Product Design
GitHub mobile apps 2, between them color helpers, data popu-   https://brianlovin.com/overthought/
                                                               automating-the-boring-parts-of-
lation from GitHub API, and dark mode switcher.                product-design




Image by Brian Lovin © GitHub
Working With Data                                                                                 144


He presented some of these plugins in a lighting talk at Fig-    3  Extend what’s possible with
                                                                 Figma Plugins
ma’s Config 2020 conference 3, along with demos of other
                                                                 https://youtu.be/SyS3h3kmBnY
internal plugins by teams from Uber and Atlassian.


USING REST API

While plugins let you update designs with data from other
sources, Figma’s REST API 4 provides a way to read and extract   4  Figma REST API
                                                                 https://www.figma.com/developers/
data from Figma as images. Some teams go to a great extent
                                                                 api
to integrate Figma into their apps, using it as a visual CMS
(Content Management System).

Michael McMillan shared on Twitter 5 how his team was tired      5  https://twitter.com/
                                                                 michaelmcmillan/
of manually exporting apartment plans created in Figma to        status/1230795934671548416
the app they are building, and automated this process with an
API:

    At the company I work at (https://bustbyte.no)
    we’re building a web app for exploring housing
    projects to potential buyers. The user can hover
    over apartments and filter them based on price,
    square meters and more.

    To make hovering work we have to manually out-
    line each apartment, we do this using Figma. This
    works great, but it’s tedious to export each outline
    (svg path) and import that to the app for every
    apartment.

    Instead of manually syncing outlines between Fig-
    ma and the app, we use Figma’s REST API. Now the
    app pulls down the outlines in realtime, without
    1) manually exporting each outline 2) committing
    them to git 3) redeploy the app. This is a 10x time
    saver.

    This made us think: What if we used Figma for ev-
    erything (and not just the outlines): price, sold sta-
Working With Data                                                                               145


    tus, square meters, number of rooms? Essentially
    turning it into our CMS.

    So we did! We use Figma’s comment feature to add
    metadata to each apartment. This is obviously a
    hack, but turns out it’s really nice! It lets us make
    changes to the app directly from our image editor.
    No dev overhead whatsoever.

Check out his thread on Twitter for screenshots and images.

Another example is Mixkit Art, a library of free art and illus-
trations. The article “How we’re using Figma as a CMS for         6  https://medium.com/@mixkit/
                                                                  using-figma-as-a-cms-for-mixkit-
Mixkit Art” 6 shares how their team automated the export of       art-how-were-using-figma-uniquely-
assets:                                                           7c8ce30dacc5


    When we’re ready to publish the new work, we
    have a Lambda script that connects to the Figma
    API. We enter an ID and it exports the high resolu-
    tion assets and copies them to S3, and from there
    we can then make it live on the site for users!

Building all of these solutions required some time, but only
your team can know if it’s worth the investment. I think it’s
great to know that the option to build something with data in
your Figma files is always here, patiently waiting.
Conclusion
Conclusion                                                        147


When I started looking for a Sketch alternative, at first I
didn’t take Figma seriously. I realized the huge potential of
the app only after spending some time with it. Figma led the
way for the next generation of design tools, and new brows-
er-based tools like Framer X and Invision Studio only proved
them right.

The strength of Figma is not in powerful components, share-
able styles, or presentation tools. These things can be copied
or improved by other apps. I believe their core strength is in
collaboration, openness and extensibility of the platform, and
a vibrant community.

Because Figma is just one click away in the browser, it opened
the doors for collaborators who never before participated in
the design process. Between product managers commenting
on a new screen, copywriters editing text in-place, and devel-
opers copying the right color from the Inspect tab, it was nev-
er easier to work together.

Openness and extensibility of the platform allow replacing
missed functionality with plugins, writing internal plugins to
solve problems unique to your team, or even integrating Fig-
ma into projects as a source of content. Their team worked
hard to make plugin development accessible to anyone with
basic knowledge of modern JavaScript.

As of this writing, the Figma Community platform is still in
beta and just recently was opened to the public, but the num-
ber of contributors and quality of resources is fantastic. I
was thoroughly impressed when the day after Apple’s WWDC
(World Wide Developers Conference) multiple iOS 14 UI kits
and widgets were already built and shared for free. I’m look-
ing forward to the future where Figma becomes the GitHub
of design, and we can reuse and build on top of each other’s
work.

This book examined Figma’s design tools, provided plugin
recommendations, discussed the best practices, and a little
bit of design theory. I hope you learned a thing or two — I
Conclusion                                                         148


definitely did while doing the research! If you want to stay up
to date with Figma’s releases, resources, and news, subscribe
to my regular newsletter Figmalion. It started as a research
project for this book but, over time, became the largest collec-
tion of Figma-related resources.

Thanks for reading! I’d love to hear your comments or ques-
tions. Send me an email at hello@efedorenko.com or reach
out on Twitter at @efedorenko.

— Eugene
